    #[1]Pressthink RSS Feed [2]Pressthink » Feed [3]Pressthink » Comments
   Feed [4]Pressthink » The Toobin principle Comments Feed [5]The rise of
   the personal franchise site in news [6]Edward Snowden, meet Jeff Bezos

   [7]Pressthink
     * [8]Home
     * [9]About
     * [10]Bio
     * [11]FAQ
     * [12]Recommended
     * [13]Talks

The Toobin principle

   Aug. 6

Repeal the concept of an informed public, repress your decision to take such
a drastic step. But it's not just Jeffrey Toobin. Congress did it too.

   Last week [14]on his CNN program Piers Morgan had just about finished a
   little speech on how you can't have any bloke with a security clearance
   spewing classified information "on a whim" when James Risen, national
   security reporter for the New York Times, interrupted him: which
   document that's come out don't you want to talk about? Meaning: which
   of the things we've learned from Edward Snowden would you, as a
   journalist, prefer not to know? Which part of the surveillance story
   that's come to light should have remained in darkness?

   It was a good question. Piers Morgan did not have much of a reply.

   When, on the same program, Jeffrey Toobin of the New Yorker said that
   public discussion about previously classified materials was "a good
   thing" but he still thought Edward Snowden was a criminal and shouldn't
   have done what he did, Risen interrupted: "We wouldn't be having this
   discussion if it wasn't for him," he said. "That's the thing I don't
   understand about the climate in Washington these days, is that people
   want to have debates on television and elsewhere, but then you want to
   throw the people who start the debates in jail."

   It was a sharp observation. Jeffery Toobin didn't have much of a reply.

   The exchange begins at 7:30 on the clip below:

   IFRAME: [15]//www.youtube.com/embed/d53QM8tnQUQ

   Ever since The Guardian [16]began to publish its revelations from the
   files of Edward Snowden, I have been trying to frame the unanswered
   question that drives my own interest in the subject.

   Disclosure: I am not pro-Snowden or anti-Snowden, because to put it
   that way unnecessarily personalizes the issue. I am not "for" the
   National Security Agency or against it. As a U.S. citizen I am
   implicated in what the NSA does, and I want it to succeed in
   discovering those who would harm us. My concern, as a writer and
   journalism professor, is with another fight: the one for public
   knowledge, for sunlight, for the facts to come out so we know what's
   going on. I am primarily interested in the journalism that Edward
   Snowden has set in motion, and the gains in public knowledge that have
   resulted from his actions, which I have called [17]the Snowden effect.

   The question that bothers me most can be put this way:

     Can there even be an informed public and consent-of-the-governed for
     decisions about electronic surveillance, or have we put those
     principles aside so that the state can have its freedom to maneuver?

   I call it unanswered but it's more than that. It's like we can't face
   it, so we choose not to frame it that way. The question is less
   unaddressed than it is repressed by a political system that can't
   handle the weight of what it's done. But now that system is being
   [18]forced to face what happened while it wasn't looking-- at itself. I
   will show you the problem by quoting four writers who have touched on
   it. Apologies for the long quotes. But if you can follow me through
   them, there will be a payoff (in pressthink) at the end.

   1. Everything from everybody

   Fred Kaplan is on the war and peace beat for Slate. (He also has a PhD
   in political science.) [19]Here he explains "how the NSA traveled down
   a slippery slope."

   "At first, they focused on tracking traffic patterns. Some phone number
   in the United States was calling suspicious people or places in, say,
   Pakistan. It might be useful to find out whose phone number it was. It
   might then be useful to find out what other people that person has been
   calling or emailing, and then it might be useful to track their phone
   calls and email patterns. Before you know it, they're storing data on
   millions of people, including a lot of Americans. Then maybe one day,
   they track someone--a phone number or email address they'd never come
   across before--engaged in some very suspicious activity. They wish that
   they'd been tracking this person for some time, so they could go back
   and see if a pattern exists without having to wait for one to emerge.
   Then they learn that they can do this; new technology makes it
   possible. So they scoop up and store everything from everybody. They
   even convince themselves that they're not `collecting' data from
   American citizens (as that would be illegal); no, they're
   just storing it; the collecting doesn't happen until they actually go
   retrieve it from the files."

   Somewhere on the slope it slid down, the NSA realizes it has to get
   legal authority to [20]collect it all. Kaplan explains:

     So they ask the FISA court--created by Congress in the 1978 Foreign
     Intelligence Surveillance Act--to rule on whether this is
     permissible, and the court complies. Specifically, it rules that
     they can do this, as long as the material they're storing is
     "relevant" to an investigation of terrorism, and the court buys the
     logic that the agency might need to go fetch data retroactively in
     such a probe. Therefore, everything is "relevant."

   The catch, as we now know, is that all of this--the ever-expanding
   surveillance in time and space, the reasoning behind it, and the FISA
   court ruling that approves it--has evolved at such high levels of
   secrecy that only a handful of people in Congress (very few people
   anywhere outside the NSA, and probably not all that many inside) know
   anything about it. This, it turns out, is what [Ron] Wyden, a member of
   the Senate Intelligence Committee, meant when he cryptically said, way
   back in October 2011, that "[21]there are two Patriot Acts in
   America"--the one that anybody can read and a "secret interpretation
   that the executive branch uses" but that nobody on the outside knows
   about at all. The public Patriot Act allows "bulk" collection of data;
   the secret interpretation defines "bulk" far more bulkily than anyone
   could have imagined.

     And here's the problem. The program was supposed to have checks and
     balances, but really it doesn't, not anymore.

   "They scoop up and store everything from everybody." The American
   public didn't know about that. The American people never voted for
   that. It's [22]doubtful that, sufficiently informed, public opinion
   would consent to that. Even so, it's possible to argue that "consent of
   the governed " was maintained because key committees in Congress were
   informed. Congress also created the FISA court and gave it these
   powers.

   But that's not enough. "Blind" consent [23]can easily be abused. The
   only possible check on that is public knowledge and open debate. Not
   for everything, of course (there have to be secrets) but for really big
   things like "scoop up and store everything from everybody." Not consent
   at some point in the process but informed consent for big decisions
   throughout the process: that is the check. It's impossible when
   everything is done in secret, which is why Kaplan says: "The program
   was supposed to have checks and balances, but really it doesn't."

   2.  A discussion the public cannot afford to have.

   Will Wilkinson [24]in The Economist picks up the story from there. He's
   more alarmed than Kaplan.

     You see, democracy here at home must be balanced against the
     requirements of security, and it is simply too dangerous to leave
     the question of this balance to the democratic public. Open
     deliberation over the appropriate balance would require saying
     something concrete about threats to public safety, and also about
     the means by which those threats might be checked. But revealing
     such information would only empower America's enemies and endanger
     American lives. Therefore, this is a discussion Americans can't
     afford to have. Therefore, the power to determine that this is a
     discussion the public cannot afford to have cannot reside in the
     democratic public. That power must reside elsewhere, with the best
     and brightest, with those who have surveyed the perils of the world
     and know what it takes to meet them. Those deep within the security
     apparatus, within the charmed circle, must therefore make the
     decision, on America's behalf, about how much democracy--about how
     much discussion about the limits of democracy, even--it is safe for
     Americans to have.

   A "discussion the public cannot afford to have" repeals the principle
   of an informed citizenry. But the decision to let things evolve in that
   way was hidden from public view. Those who wanted to show it to us were
   prevented from doing so- or prosecuted in the case of some whistle
   blowers. Wilkinson:

     It is crucial, then, that any attempt by those on the inside to
     reveal the real, secret rules governing American life be met with
     overwhelming, intimidating retaliation. In order to maintain a
     legitimizing democratic imprimatur, it is of course important that a
     handful of elected officials be brought into the anteroom of the
     inner council, but it's important that they know barely more than
     that there is a significant risk that we will all perish if they, or
     the rest of us, know too much, and they must be made to feel that
     they dare not publicly speak what little they have been allowed to
     know. Even senators. Even senators must fear to describe America's
     laws to America's citizens.

   An informed public is not really possible under those conditions. And
   yet those conditions were approved by elected representatives. But they
   never shared with the voters what they were doing. Some in Congress
   [25]realized the problem but they were helpless to do anything about
   it.

   3. Free to mislead us.

   Here's Timothy Edgar, a lawyer who was on the inside (he worked for the
   Director of National Intelligence) [26]writing in the Wall Street
   Journal.

     The FISA court may have reviewed the programs, but the public never
     got its day in court. The ACLU has challenged the constitutionality
     of NSA surveillance programs for years, but that case never got to
     the issue of constitutional rights. The intelligence community
     argued, and the Supreme Court agreed, that the civil-liberties
     groups couldn't maintain their lawsuit. Civil-liberties advocates
     represented a variety of people with entirely reasonable fears of
     monitoring. Whether they were actually under surveillance was a
     secret (and properly so). The government argued vigorously that this
     secrecy meant the case could not go forward, and the court agreed.

   Aye: "The public never got its day in court." As with the legal system,
   so with the Congress. Open debate never got its chance. Edgar :

     Sens. Ron Wyden and Mark Udall encountered a similar Catch-22 in
     2011 when trying to raise questions about the NSA call-records
     program, when the Patriot Act was up for review. Although they were
     briefed on the program behind closed doors, they made no headway in
     arguing for greater transparency with the public. The resulting
     debate was highly skewed. Administration officials were free to make
     misleading arguments that the Patriot Act was just like an ordinary
     subpoena. Any member of Congress willing to spend a few hours in a
     small room in the Capitol knew that secret court opinions had
     approved collection that reached far wider than any subpoena. Those
     who did know about the opinions could not express any concerns in
     open debate. Secrecy prevented the Congress, like the Supreme Court,
     from having a real argument over surveillance powers.

   No real argument = zero possibility for informed consent.
   Administration officials who are free to mislead are liberated from the
   check that a free press and an inquisitive Congress are supposed to
   provide. A democracy that is not permitted to know the "secret rules"
   adopted by the state cannot operate properly. Will Wilkinson thinks the
   whole system is illegitimate, a sham. Timothy Edgar thinks the public
   would approve if it knew more about the safeguards in place. Fred
   Kaplan is somewhere in the middle; he thinks the NSA is in trouble, and
   recommends reforms. But they all agree that the necessary checks and
   balances had disappeared.

   These include an informed public. That principle had been repealed for
   scrutiny of the surveillance state. But no one ever put it that way.
   And they still don't. It was too big to face, so bit-by-bit a decision
   was made not to face it. Repressed is the right word for that.

   4. A choice not to be informed.

   Edward Snowden is the return of the repressed. By going AWOL and
   leaking documents that show what the NSA is up to, he forced Congress
   to ask itself: did we really consent to that? With his disclosures the
   principle of an informed public roared back to life. [27]Writing at
   MSNBC.com about documents de-classified by the Director of National
   Intelligence in advance of his testimony before the Senate, Adam Serwer
   puts it all together:

     The reports affirm that the current backlash in Congress is a
     product of public knowledge of the programs. Some legislators, like
     Democratic Sens. Ron Wyden of Oregon and Mark Udall of Colorado, had
     been making public statements for years that hinted at information
     members of Congress were being told in private. Legislators who say
     they were ignorant about how the authorities were being used prior
     to the revelations effectively made a choice not to be informed.
     They then voted to reauthorize these laws without knowing what they
     actually did. Those legislators who were exercising their oversight
     responsibilities and were concerned about surveillance couldn't
     inform the public in detail about what was happening. Far from
     affirming the Obama administration's insistence that congressional
     oversight serves as a key check on executive branch authority, it
     mostly raises the question of whether effective oversight can be
     conducted in secret.

   Some in Congress "made a choice not to be informed." Those who tried to
   exercise oversight were prevented from informing the rest of us. (But
   Bruce Ackerman [28]says they could have busted through that.) Then
   Snowden came along and blew everything up. Adam Serwer comments:

     Absent former NSA contractor Edward Snowden's leaks to The
     Guardian and the Washington Post that sparked the controversy, the
     current debate over surveillance powers wouldn't even be happening.
     As long as the information was secret, legislators could renew these
     authorities without having to worry about a public backlash. It was
     only the leaks that spurred Congress into doing its job. That leaves
     legislators pushing to curtail government surveillance powers in the
     awkward position of owing their political momentum to a man the
     Obama administration wants extradited and prosecuted for espionage.

   Right. It's the same contradiction Jeffrey Toobin of CNN is caught in.
   He doesn't think Snowden should have done what he did. But Toobin does
   think the debate that Snowden started "is a good thing." When James
   Risen pointed this out ("We wouldn't be having this discussion if it
   wasn't for him") Toobin -- mindlessly -- agreed. "That's true," he
   said. (It's at 8:15 on the clip.) At this point Toobin has no idea what
   he's saying. The only coherent position available to him is to argue
   for the repeal of an informed public: "Piers, this debate we're having
   right now, it's a bad thing!"

   But he doesn't have the courage or self-awareness required to say that
   on television. At some point he internalized the idea of a "discussion
   the public cannot afford to have," then repressed any memory of having
   done that. That's why he welcomes a debate that he would also welcome
   the prevention of. But Congress did the same thing. [29]So did
   President Obama. The Toobin principle: repeal the concept of an
   informed public, repress your decision to take such a drastic step
   because it's too much to face.

   Let me go back to my unanswered question:

     Can there even be an informed public and consent-of-the-governed for
     decisions about electronic surveillance, or have we put those
     principles aside so that the state can have its freedom to maneuver?

   People who make a career in journalism cannot pretend to neutrality on
   a matter like that. If a free society needs them -- and I think it does
   -- it needs them to stand strongly against the eclipse of informed
   consent.

After Matter: Notes, Reactions & Links

   Over at the Atlantic site, Conor Friedersdorf [30]builds upon this post
   by going back to look at how the debate over, and news coverage of the
   re-authorization of the Patriot Act in 2011 was disabled by secrecy.
   This made informed decision-making and genuine public opinion
   impossible.

     Even those elected representatives informed about the full extent of
     government surveillance were deprived of normal legislative
     practices, like floor debate, letters and phone calls from
     constituents, input from experts outside government, and public
     opinion polls, that properly factor into their typical deliberation
     and voting decisions.

   That's it, exactly, Conor.

   Security and privacy expert Bruce Schneier [31]writes on the virtually
   the same subject I addressed here:

     Both government agencies and corporations have cloaked themselves in
     so much secrecy that it's impossible to verify anything they say;
     revelation after revelation demonstrates that they've been lying to
     us regularly and tell the truth only when there's no alternative.

     There's much more to come. Right now, the press has published only a
     tiny percentage of the documents Snowden took with him. And
     Snowden's files are only a tiny percentage of the number of secrets
     our government is keeping, awaiting the next whistle-blower.

     Ronald Reagan once said "trust but verify." That works only if we
     can verify. In a world where everyone lies to us all the time, we
     have no choice but to trust blindly, and we have no reason to
     believe that anyone is worthy of blind trust. It's no wonder that
     most people are ignoring the story; it's just too much cognitive
     dissonance to try to cope with it.

   That's why I used the word "repressed."

   Ars Technica [32]asked Schneier ("one of the world's foremost
   cryptographers") what he would do to fix the problems with trust and
   verification:

     The way Schneier sees it, in an attempt to keep the operational
     details of the targets secret, the NSA (and presumably other
     intelligence agencies, too) has also claimed that it also needs to
     keep secret the legal justification for what it's doing. "That's
     bullshit," Schneier says.

     The famed computer scientist wants to apply traditionally open and
     public scrutiny to how the NSA operates.

     "How much does this stuff cost and does it do any good?" he said.
     "And if they can't tell us that, they don't get approved. Let's say
     the NSA costs $100 million annually and that an FBI agent is
     $100,000 a year. Is this worth 1,000 FBI agents? Or half and half?
     Nowhere will you find that analysis."

   When the CEO and editor-at-large of Foreign Policy magazine is
   [33]saying: it took me a while, but now I see why Snowden was
   necessary... it means the elites in Washington are waking up to
   something big.

     Eugene Robinson of the Washington Post [34]did D.C. residents a big
     favor earlier this week when he courageously acknowledged the
     service Edward Snowden did for the United States... and for the
     global debate on rights and privacy in the big data era. I have
     myself been too slow to recognize that the benefits we have derived
     from Snowden's revelations substantially outweigh the costs
     associated with the breach. It is time we move from the kind of
     Patriot Act thinking that overstates security threats to such a
     degree that we subordinate our basic freedoms to something more
     consistent with our historical systems of checks and balances.

   Law professor and former Assistant Attorney General Jack Goldsmith
   [35]on a theme similar to the one I explore here:

     Presumptively in our democracy, important national policies are
     vetted in public, subject to criticism and analysis in the press and
     by elected representatives and civil society and courts, and
     ultimately approved, or not, by the People in elections. The
     accountability system forces public officials to justify their
     actions, to address criticisms, to confront new and critical
     information and arguments, to consider new approaches, and to
     correct mistakes. This messy process does not always produce optimal
     policies. But it produces pretty good policies on the whole, allows
     for pretty robust policy change in light of new information, and in
     any event is a more legitimate system for executing public policy
     than one that takes place in secret.

     Few of the traditional elements of democratic scrutiny and
     deliberation apply to the NSA. Even after the Snowden affair, NSA
     and its oversight bodies remain extraordinarily secretive.

   In a [36]guest post at TechDirt, Jennifer Hoelzer, a former staffer for
   Senator Ron Wyden, provides enormous detail on how for years he was
   prevented from informing the public about where the surveillance state
   had gotten to in the U.S. It is quite a tale.

   [37]Matt Welch of Reason magazine on the Obama Administration
   observance of the Toobin principle:

     We are totally ready to have this conversation we have been actively
     trying to suppress, we are being transparent in our
     non-transparency, and in the name of openness and deliberation we
     must smother this attempt at open deliberation.

   At ThinkProgress, Zack Beauchamp responds to this post, usefully: [38]A
   Guide To Thinking About NSA Surveillance And Democracy.

   Josh Stearns [39]adds further background and fleshes out the argument
   in this post. Stearns reminded me of this: "My sole motive," Edward
   Snowden told the Guardian in his [40]first public interview, "is to
   inform the public as to that which is done in their name and that which
   is done against them."

   "A grandiose narcissist who deserves to be in prison." [41]Jeffery
   Toobin on Snowden in June:

     The American government, and its democracy, are flawed institutions.
     But our system offers legal options to disgruntled government
     employees and contractors. They can take advantage of federal
     whistle-blower laws; they can bring their complaints to Congress;
     they can try to protest within the institutions where they work. But
     Snowden did none of this. Instead, in an act that speaks more to his
     ego than his conscience, he threw the secrets he knew up in the
     air--and trusted, somehow, that good would come of it. We all now
     have to hope that he's right.

   [42]Tweet

   IFRAME:
   [43]http://www.facebook.com/plugins/like.php?href=http://pressthink.org
   /2013/08/the-toobin-principle/&layout=button_count&show_faces=false&wid
   th=450&action=recommend&colorscheme=light&height=21

   This entry was posted on Tuesday, August 6th, 2013 at 1:58 pm and is
   filed under [44]Uncategorized. You can follow any responses to this
   entry through the [45]RSS 2.0 feed. Both comments and pings are
   currently closed.

169 Comments

    1. [46]Dana F. Blankenhorn says:
       [47]August 6, 2013 at 2:30 pm
       This is great. Let me ask one more question. In a unipolar world,
       where the U.S. writ is obeyed everywhere, is it possible to reveal
       anything the government doesn't want revealed? And if that's true,
       doesn't the U.S. government have the kind of absolute power that
       corrupts absolutely?
       Obama may be a great and good man. But what if he's succeeded by
       another Cheney, and these precedents he's set haven't been
       challenged? If so, all the fears of the cyber-libertarians,
       starting with George Orwell, will have been realized.
          + proximity1 says:
            [48]August 7, 2013 at 12:50 pm
            RE: "Obama may be a great and good man."
            Actually, no. No `if's', `and's' or `but's' about it. He is
            neither a "great" nor even a "good" man-in the sense that I
            understand you to mean.
            That train has left the station and he wasn't on it. Obama,
            properly described in general terms, is a disgrace. Period.
               o edde says:
                 [49]August 7, 2013 at 12:57 pm
                 Took the words right from my keyboard.
                 He is shockingly without principles.
               o Pelu Maad says:
                 [50]August 9, 2013 at 4:02 pm
                 Gee.....one wonders how you came to that
                 conclusion....and when...????
                    # Anomalous says:
                      [51]August 11, 2013 at 4:31 pm
                      When he pardoned those that participated in torture,
                      when he prevented torturers from being extradited
                      multiple times, when he executes without any
                      judicial process, when he kills thousands of
                      civilians in countries in which war has not been
                      declared, when he continues the destruction of
                      investigative journalism, when he prosecutes
                      whistleblowers such as Thomas Drake who went through
                      the "legitimate channels" before going to the media
                      with his concerns, when he oversees DEA raids on
                      medical marijuana dispensaries in California, when
                      he forces journalists like James Risen to testify
                      against their sources. . .
                      Do I need to keep going? That's just what I could
                      think of off the top of my head. Concluding that
                      Obama is a lawless criminal is way overdue.
          + [52]Tom Carberry says:
            [53]August 7, 2013 at 1:58 pm
            "Obama may be a great and good man"
            Or as the facts show, he may make Ted Bundy and John Gacy look
            like Little Sisters of the Poor when it comes to mass
            murdering psychopathy.
            The whole world has Obama's paranoid delusions and psychopathy
            on daily display, and only recently have people started to see
            that the emperor has no clothes in which to hide his evil.
               o mikeinportc says:
                 [54]August 8, 2013 at 4:57 pm
                 +1
               o Pelu Maad says:
                 [55]August 9, 2013 at 4:03 pm
                 My guess is the world is mostly glad we didn't elect
                 Mitt.
               o art guerrilla says:
                 [56]August 9, 2013 at 5:19 pm
                 now, now, that's simply not true: *anyone* who gets to
                 the heights of Saint Obama has to have made their deal
                 with the devil already...
                 non-psychopaths need not apply...
                 if you ain't gonna kill for Empire, what good are you ? ?
                 ?
                 our grand experiment has been perverted, 1984-style...
                 simply astounding to observe, and impossible to
                 comprehend...
                 i shake my head in shame and frustration...
                 one of my favorite quotes comes to mind:
                 The Price of Freedom is Eternal Vigilance
                 only i didn't realize it was The They being eternally,
                 omnisciently vigilant of us sheeple, and the price would
                 be *our* freedoms...
                 art guerrilla
                 aka ann archy
                 eof
    2. [57]Jay Rosen says:
       [58]August 6, 2013 at 3:46 pm
       Andrew Tyndall of the [59]The Tyndall Report emails:

     The Ecuadorian Library, the [60]Bruce Sterling article you linked to
     from your Twitter feed, makes the observation that we cannot
     separate the phenomenon of the national security state from other,
     commercial, manifestations of Big Data: the Googles, the Facebooks,
     the Amazons, the Internet itself.
     For sure, the powers of the state and the powers of the corporation
     are not one and the same. Yet I find it persuasive to spend more
     time considering their similarities than their differences.
     The phenomenon of Big Data is unreservedly a good thing: it enables
     us to live our lives in a more targeted, more autonomous, more
     differentiated way. It improves the quality of the journalism we
     engage with, the goods we consume, the culture that enriches us.
     You are right to argue that our informed consent is indispensible to
     our enjoyment of the benefits of Big Data. In other words, Big Data
     should be under our control since without us, as a society, it could
     not exist in the first place. It is nothing more than the sum total
     of our collective activities.
     There is a second requirement too: that the operation of Big Data be
     transparent, since opacity prevents control.
     So it is at the intersection of these two principles -- control and
     transparency -- that the questions for the national security state
     reside. The more it wants to keep secrets, the less massive its data
     collection must be. The more it wants Big Data, the less secretive
     it must be.
     There is nothing inherently wrong with either. The current crisis
     arises from the national security state's desire to have both.
          + Chuck Erickson says:
            [61]August 8, 2013 at 1:14 pm
            Well stated.
          + [62]Josh Stearns says:
            [63]August 9, 2013 at 10:48 am
            That is a useful addition to the conversation from Andrew
            Tyndall and reminds me of a connect I hadn't originally made
            when I first ready your piece Jay. While your piece, and my
            response earlier, focus on the role of journalism, there is a
            clear need for more digital (and data) literacy efforts to
            help people understand all kinds of Big Data and therefor want
            to demand more information about how their data is used and
            collected. I write about what such a campaign could look like
            over [64].
    3. Steiner says:
       [65]August 6, 2013 at 5:28 pm
       "Can there even be an informed public and consent-of-the-governed
       for decisions about electronic surveillance"
       -
       Yes, certainly. It's not difficult at all.
       The public merely needs the truth about the overall surveillance in
       general Who/What/Why terms; no need for the highly technical
       (`secret') details on exactly How it's done.
       It's hardly a public newsflash that the NSA has been collecting
       foreign government electronic/communications data around the world
       in large amounts, for half a century... with sophisticated, ever
       improving technology. We knew who the NSA was, what they were doing
       {generally}, and why they were doing it.
       And certainly foreign governments & potential U.S. enemies were
       also well aware of what the NSA was all about.
       What is "new" publicly (thanks to Snowden) is that NSA now targets
       Everyone/Everywhere (including Americans) via a surprisingly vast,
       covert telecommunications/internet electronic collection system-
       feeding a massive database/analysis system.
       There's no reason this new NSA activity could not have been made
       public and debated in Congress/media -- except that it's blatantly
       non-Constitutional, illegal, and represents massive criminality.
       Hence the strong efforts by NSA and many other Federal
       agencies/persons -- to keep it totally secret from the public.
       The NSA's long criminal history was first publicly uncovered by the
       U.S. Senate Church Committee in the 1970's. No one was punished;
       instead Congress invented the unconstitutional "FISA" secret court
       to rubber-stamp future NSA wrongdoing. It should be obvious to all
       that "secret courts" can not exist in a free society.
       There's nothing unique about an "informed public and
       consent-of-the-governed" regarding electronic surveillance -- it's
       as easy as many other similar issues in U.S. Defense policy and
       Justice operations.
       But Power Corrupts; there's no reason whatsoever for the citizenry
       to trust the NSA at all.
          + edde says:
            [66]August 7, 2013 at 12:55 pm
            Perfectly stated.
               o gezzerx says:
                 [67]August 8, 2013 at 9:06 am
                 "If you tell a lie big enough and keep repeating it,
                 people will eventually come to believe it. The lie can be
                 maintained only for such time as the State can shield the
                 people from the political, economic and/or military
                 consequences of the lie. It thus becomes vitally
                 important for the State to use all of its powers to
                 repress dissent, for the truth is the mortal enemy of the
                 lie, and thus by extension, the truth is the greatest
                 enemy of the State."
                 Joseph Goebbels quote
                 If you don't know who Joseph Goebbels was,Google him,you
                 may be surprised who he was & what he did. Are we
                 becoming what we once despised ? ? ?
                 REMEMBER: POLITICIANS AND DIAPERS SHOULD BE CHANGED OFTEN
                 AND FOR THE SAME REASON.
                    # Pelu Maad says:
                      [68]August 9, 2013 at 4:06 pm
                      Nah...it's just getting harder to pretend to be what
                      we NEVER were in the first place.
    4. Paul Baer says:
       [69]August 6, 2013 at 5:38 pm
       Excellent analysis. The point that "Obama welcomes a debate that he
       also would have welcomed the prevention of" bears some
       contemplation. His role as President requires him to prosecute
       someone whom, as a private individual, he would surely have
       admired.
       We have entered some rather uncharted territory... Interesting
       times, indeed!
    5. Chris Dixon says:
       [70]August 6, 2013 at 5:47 pm
       It is perfectly consistent to believe all of the following:
       1) The debate Snowden started is good for democracy and the US
       2) Snowden probably broke the law
       3) People who break the law should be held accountable.
          + Jack Mitchell says:
            [71]August 6, 2013 at 6:00 pm
            Just don't forget
            4) If convicted he should be pardoned and given a medal.
               o Pelu Maad says:
                 [72]August 9, 2013 at 4:08 pm
                 LOL...
               o Jeff says:
                 [73]August 26, 2013 at 5:40 am
                 Preferably the [74]Presidential Medal of Freedom, awarded
                 by whoever is Chief Executive after all the lawbreakers
                 are impeached and/or dismissed and then shipped off to
                 The Hague.
          + [75]Manuel "Moe" G says:
            [76]August 6, 2013 at 6:06 pm
            to Chris Dixon: true, but 1,2,3 also consistent with
            A) The debate Snowden started is good for democracy and the US
            B) _forbidding_ such a debate is also good for democracy and
            the US, because it gives the NSA the latitude to keep us safe
            C) We can prefer B over A because no risk to us of a federal
            prosecution
               o Frankie says:
                 [77]August 7, 2013 at 7:22 am
                 The hiding of information is *NOT* good for US democracy.
                 It might be good for a small portion of individual US
                 citizens, who would be at increased risk of terrorist
                 attack. But the nation as a whole would survive.
                 TERRORISTS CAN NEVER DEFEAT US, EXCEPT IN THE WAYS WE
                 SUBVERT OURSELVES. That's why they're just terrorists
                 rather than an invading army.
                 If protecting individual citizens were of paramount
                 importance, we could mandate security cameras and
                 microphones, everywhere at all times. We could mandate
                 national photo ID cards, and keep a permanent record of
                 the actions of every person in the country. We could
                 mandate GPS tracking of every vehicle and communications
                 device.
                 The surveillance state is BAD for democracy.
                    # Marty says:
                      [78]August 8, 2013 at 4:25 am
                      It's funny that someone would spout "war on
                      terrorism" propaganda here.
                      1) You see, the issue at hand is this - Terrorism
                      accounts for less than 1 % of all deaths in the US,
                      yearly. The biggest killers are americans
                      themselves.
                      2) You wouldn't have to worry about terrorism at
                      all, if it wasn't for the history of war and
                      genocide, and over-throwing foreign governments that
                      U.S. has
                         @ Pelu Maad says:
                           [79]August 9, 2013 at 4:09 pm
                           So who is the bigger threat to the average
                           American....Al Qaeda....or the Tea Party?
                         @ Hooker Jay says:
                           [80]August 16, 2013 at 5:40 pm
                           So who is the bigger threat to the average
                           American....Al Qaeda....or the Tea Party?
                           America's greatest economic and national
                           security threat was, is, always had been, and
                           always will be incumbency and the
                           centrist-extremists (i.e. Toobin, Noonan) whose
                           inverted fascism only serves to enable, reward,
                           shield, defend, and immunize them from the
                           "democracy" the great unwashed rabble might
                           impose on them. Especially an informed unwashed
                           rabble ...
          + [81]Jay Rosen says:
            [82]August 6, 2013 at 6:17 pm
            Jeffrey Toobin went beyond 1-3. He also said Snowden should
            not have done what he did. That was he "against" all that.
               o David says:
                 [83]August 7, 2013 at 7:55 am
                 His passion on this issue also revealed where his
                 sympathies lie. He railed against Snowden as a "grandiose
                 narcissist."
                 If Toobin genuinely felt the weight of both sides, he
                 wouldn't lean so strongly against Snowden's actions. He
                 would instead speak of the whole matter as a sort of
                 tragedy.
                    # Pelu Maad says:
                      [84]August 9, 2013 at 4:11 pm
                      Weiner and A-Rod have raised the narcissist bar so
                      high it takes serious effort to qualify...
          + [85]David Kaib says:
            [86]August 7, 2013 at 9:57 am
            "3) People who break the law should be held accountable."
            If that is true, and the people who break the law are
            government officials, and they are engaged in a cover up
            (including lying about it), and no one actually thinks that
            *everyone* who breaks the law should be held accountable, it
            doesn't make sense to apply this principle to the person who
            reveals official wrongdoing but not the official wrongdoers.
            How about when the lawbreakers and the one's making the
            prosectutorial decisions all work for the same boss?
          + willibro says:
            [87]August 7, 2013 at 1:40 pm
            Get back to me on (3) when Jamie Dimon and Hank Greenberg are
            both in jail.
               o D Davies says:
                 [88]August 8, 2013 at 7:09 am
                 Thank you. I was waiting for that (& it's still only the
                 tip of the iceberg)
          + joe says:
            [89]August 8, 2013 at 6:23 am
            1, 2, 3 are consistent in a legalistic frame, in that they are
            consistent with a few possible worlds.
            In a scientific frame, they are inconsistent in that you will
            in the real world fail to see that sequence with any
            regularity. We're in the process of seeing right now whether
            it will even happen sufficiently on the multidecade timescale.
            We've had this process ongoing for at least a decade (who
            knows how much longer). We've only seen one effective
            whistleblower, and a few others who've been ignored and had
            their careers destroyed, because in practice, those three
            beliefs are in most cases inconsistent in conjunction with the
            known pattern of human behavior.
            We're not in a court of law. We're not in a platonic
            mathematical universal, where the only questions are
            necessary, sufficient or inconsistent.
            We're in a world of substance where the question of the
            probability of a stable social reality is the most important
            question, whether something happens in fact and how often.
            To make it simple, it is physically possible for objects to
            tunnel through other objects. It is "consistent" with reality
            that a car sits in a garage with all doors closed, and a
            second later it sits outside the garage, without any door
            opening in the intervening period.
            However, anyone who would make that claim of consistency, if
            they weren't just making a thought experiment in quantum
            physics, would be either insane or a liar, because in fact the
            probability is infinitesimal.
            You can argue coherently that democracy is only practical for
            a subset of problems. But you can't argue coherently that your
            "three possibilities" are sociologically consistent.
            It seems like the pushback to this is almost theological,
            rather than an actual discussion. It's meta-meta-meta, about
            what we can and can't talk about, not about the real facts of
            the matter. It's like a waking dream.
            And that dreaming position is taken by those who ultimately
            claim to be pragmatic and non-ideological. Amazing.
    6. Jack Mitchell says:
       [90]August 6, 2013 at 6:01 pm
       "Disclosure: I am not pro-Snowden or anti-Snowden, because to put
       it that way unnecessarily personalizes the issue. I am not "for"
       the National Security Agency or against it. As a U.S. citizen I am
       implicated in what the NSA does, and I want it to succeed in
       discovering those who would harm us. My concern, as a writer and
       journalism professor, is with another fight: the one for public
       knowledge, for sunlight, for the facts to come out so we know
       what's going on."
       This is disingenuous, not to mention professorial. The debate about
       the role of the secret police in a democratic society is not like
       other policy questions. If you are in favour of sunlight and an
       informed public, you HAVE to be against a central role for the
       secret police in the control of knowledge.
          + Jay Schiavone says:
            [91]August 7, 2013 at 8:31 am
            Just so. While Glenn Greenwald can be effusive in his praise
            of Mr. Rosen, I find the professor's continual qualification
            and equivocating tends to undermine his arguments. Two years
            ago Mr. Rosen heaped praise on the dreadful NPR simply because
            they announced that they would discontinue the useless
            practice of "he said, she said" journalism. He hasn't followed
            up to discuss whether or not NPR honored the pledge. Perhaps
            he has made the choice not to be informed. But more likely he
            refuses to choose at all. Part of Mr. Rosen's appeal as a
            critic or analyst of "the media" is his evident commitment to
            avoid acknowledgement of all but the most flagrantly apparent
            controversies. He seemed to probe and write with some candor
            when he famously identified the "church of the savvy." But as
            I look back, he did not so much expose a shameful secret as
            label a trend. Labeling trends is the meat of modern
            journalism, like listicles. His recent flogging of "The
            Snowden Effect" is rather weak tea. We can't avoid the issue,
            and what else might one call it? Not whistle-blowing. Not
            treason. Mr. Rosen would never stick his neck out and make
            that kind of commitment. He would lose favor with half of his
            readers if he picked a label like that. Better to use "Snowden
            Effect," and provide as little meaning as possible.
            So we end up with his tweaking of Jeffrey Toobin. Mr. Rosen
            can't let him have it. Even in the pursuit of "sunlight."
            Sunlight is no match for "he said she said."
               o Jay Schiavone says:
                 [92]August 7, 2013 at 9:49 am
                 "It was 27 years ago I did a dissertation on the concept
                 of "the public." So today's post at PressThink is
                 personal." -Jay Rosen
    7. David says:
       [93]August 7, 2013 at 8:01 am
       Really excellent analysis.
       One thing that goes unmentioned is class. Jeffrey Toobin benefits
       from the status quo as an elite commentator -- a sort of nobleman
       of our day. Snowden's actions threaten that status quo. Trust in
       government and trust in mainstream media go hand in hand, since so
       much of what is reported comes from government officials.
       The point being: perhaps Toobin can't speak to the issue not
       because he's caught in a contradiction but because speaking
       honestly to the issue undermines his status and that of the
       Establishment that grants him that status.
    8. efreilly says:
       [94]August 7, 2013 at 8:25 am
       The premise for this article seems a little flawed. It presumes
       that because the ensuing debate has been positive, Snowden's
       actions are necessarily legal or justifiable. That isn't so. We
       have rules all over the place in courts of law regarding the
       admissibility of evidence, even if catching bad guys is ultimately
       a positive thing. The case to justify Snowden's abuse of his own
       power to disclose these documents to which he was privy is ironic
       considering the subject matter.
       The court of public opinion has never been the place where we try
       criminal proceedings and it shouldn't be in this case either.
          + [95]Jay Rosen says:
            [96]August 7, 2013 at 9:57 am
            Where did I say Snowden's actions are legal? I don't believe I
            made any statement about that one way or another.
               o [97]Michael Murry says:
                 [98]August 8, 2013 at 12:09 am
                 A good and timely article, Mr. Rosen. I especially noted
                 with interest the first part of your title: "Repeal the
                 concept of an informed public, repress your decision to
                 take such a drastic step." It put me immediately in mind
                 of George Orwell's definition of doublethink, or
                 double-bind doctrinaire schizophrenia: namely, "the power
                 of holding two contradictory beliefs in one's mind
                 simultaneously, and accepting both of them." Jeffrey
                 Toobin's performance in this instance surely rates some
                 sort of Orwellian award for doublethink personified.
                 As Orwell noted, a Corporate Party functionary like
                 Jeffrey Toobin must psychologically repress the obvious
                 import of what he proposes -- criminalizing investigative
                 journalism -- in order to come across as sincere in his
                 outrageous proposal without suffering the cognitive
                 dissonance that would normally accompany such an equally
                 obvious betrayal of journalistic truth. As Orwell put it:
                 "The process has to be conscious, or it would not be
                 carried out with sufficient precision, but it also has to
                 be unconscious, or it would bring with it a feeling of
                 falsity and hence of guilt."
                 Mr Toobin cannot with a straight face just come out and
                 shout the Party slogan "Ignorance is Strength," even
                 though he obviously believes that the Corporate Party
                 with two right-wings (thank you, Gore Vidal) must keep
                 Americans ignorant and under constant surveillance in the
                 interests of the Party's perpetuation of itself in power.
                 So he must, on the one hand, pay lip service -- on a
                 general level -- to the need of a democratic society for
                 truthful information.
                 Yet on the other hand, he must denigrate and vilify and
                 condemn every practical avenue that the American people
                 have for assuring themselves of this necessary
                 information. This he does by taking refuge in the lazy
                 semantic abstraction, "breaking the law," which sounds
                 defensible unless one distinguishes between misdemeanor
                 whistleblowing versus felony murders. Both constitute
                 "breaking the law," but common sense and context can
                 easily distinguish the vast difference between them.
                 Jeffrey Toobin obviously cannot (or chooses not to) make
                 the necessary distinctions, so he confuses and conflates
                 wildly different levels of abstraction, ultimately
                 looking the complete fool.
                 Pathetic, really. But it seems to pay well. So, good work
                 if you can get it.
          + [99]David Kaib says:
            [100]August 7, 2013 at 10:00 am
            Courts and the public sphere are very different things. The
            rules in courts rarely apply in any other setting.
          + Chris Harries says:
            [101]August 8, 2013 at 1:37 pm
            "We have rules all over the place in courts of law regarding
            the admissibility of evidence, even if catching bad guys is
            ultimately a positive thing."
            It appears, thanks to Snowden's revelations, that those very
            rules are being breached, on an industrial scale, by several
            agencies, including police departments, the IRS and
            immigration services.
            The recording of masses of personal data, and its availability
            to prosecutors, might very well explain the curious trend away
            from criminal trials in favour of plea bargaining in which all
            the power lies on the side of the state.
    9. [102]Thingumbob (@Thingumbobesq) says:
       [103]August 7, 2013 at 8:34 am
       Controlling the surveillance state's agenda is the Anglo Dutch
       financial oligarchy. It is run out of the City of London not Wall
       St.(they are merely junior partners.) Why is GCHQ (Britain's
       NSA)gobbling up much more trans-Atlantic data than the NSA for
       instance? What is our special "intelligence gathering" relationship
       with Canada, NZ, Australia and Britain and when was it approved by
       treaty by Congress? Why was HSBC (Hong Kong Shanghai Bank Corp.)
       not charged criminally for laundering Billions of drug money for
       Mexican cartels? Why has the Saudi royal family's (see the al
       Yamamah BAE UK scandal) funding of the 911 hijackers been covered
       up by this ever loving surveillance state? By making it seem that
       this is a case of only some wayward US technocrats gone astray
       misses the forest for the trees. Sure, this all violates our
       Constitution's protection of due process, but the financial
       oligarchy is in the drivers seat here.
          + Peggy says:
            [104]August 15, 2013 at 2:16 am
            100% on target!! Good Questions.
   10. Clive Hulett says:
       [105]August 7, 2013 at 8:58 am
       I fear the debate continuously falls into the trap of examining the
       minutiae of the issues at hand, so the substance of what is a
       terribly dire situation is lost in the fog of murkiness.
       The debate is not about silly almost abstract premises - `the
       debate is good for US democracy, but the guy who made the debate
       possible should be prosecuted'.
       The debate is being deliberately melted away by dross and
       subterfuge.
       Ultimately this debate, this "elephant in the room" is about power;
       of this there can be no doubt. Power = Wealth = Power. In the hands
       of the few at the expense of the many. Those who have it, that tiny
       "upper" echelon are grimly holding on to it, using all the
       resources and deviousness at their disposal.
       Whilst Greenwald, Chomsky Hedges Scahill Assange Manning Snowden
       and many others are now finding an ever increasing audience through
       the ubiquitous internet. Maybe we are getting to a tipping point.
       If I had a belief in the supernatural I would pray for it to be so.
       I certainly hope it is.
          + Lance says:
            [106]August 7, 2013 at 12:50 pm
            Let us pray and hope together.
          + D Davies says:
            [107]August 8, 2013 at 7:25 am
            May I add an appreciation for Tim Berners-Lee here? He dreamed
            up the non-hierarchical www and gave it to us for free. It's
            changed (or developed) everyone's thinking in essential ways.
            He's a big part of the discussion here, acknowledged or not.
   11. [108]Brian O'Leary says:
       [109]August 7, 2013 at 9:51 am
       When the U.S. government decided to close embassies in the Middle
       East and northern Africa this past weekend, it had no problems
       citing its intelligence gathering as a source for what it feels is
       a credible threat. I'm unable to understand why the government
       feels it can talk about its surveillance of a specific terrorist
       threat when it sees Snowden's much more general revelations as a
       huge risk.
          + [110]Jay Rosen says:
            [111]August 7, 2013 at 10:07 am
            Here's a post about exactly that issue by national security
            blogger Marcy Wheeler:
            [112]http://www.emptywheel.net/2013/08/06/was-it-nsa-or-a-yeme
            ni-ally-leaking-the-clear-orders-from-zawahiri-to-wuhayshi/
               o D Davies says:
                 [113]August 8, 2013 at 8:18 am
                 Oh for pity's sake, who thinks the `terror alert' is
                 anything other than a pathetic ploy to get the public to
                 accept NSA bulk spying?
                 If the NSA had actually intercepted the electronic
                 communication in question both ends of the convo would
                 have been taken out in short order with oh-so-accurate
                 drones. But, of course, `terrorists' don't phone or email
                 each other anymore because the Manning/Snowden
                 revelations alerted them to the fact that they are being
                 listened to.
                 There are so many layers of official deceit that it is
                 almost impossible to discuss anything anymore.
                    # [114]Michael Murry says:
                      [115]August 8, 2013 at 3:04 pm
                      Yes. The whole thing reeks of ham-handed media
                      management. After all, as President Kennedy used to
                      say: "The ship of state leaks from the top."
                      Here in southern Taiwan, the late-night talk show
                      hosts (whom my wife calls "the political animals")
                      pretty much dismissed the whole embassy closure
                      thing as a transparent political attempt by the
                      Obama administration to divert attention away from
                      the gigantic black eye that its own surveillance
                      policies have given it. I told my wife that back in
                      the Clinton administration, this sort of thing went
                      by the name of "wagging the dog."
   12. gorilla cookies says:
       [116]August 7, 2013 at 10:55 am
       First off, I agree it's disingenuous for the Prof to say he's not
       for Snowden, when he obviously is.
       Second, there isn't really much of a contradiction in what Toobin
       said, even if Rosen fails to see it. It is possible to think that
       it's good to have more openness about our national security
       apparatus, without approving of what Snowden did. There have been
       many articles over the years on what the NSA has been doing. Not
       all of them were sensationalized like the Guardian's coverage was,
       which is why the Snowden revelations have received more attention.
       But those articles do prove it is possible to have a debate on this
       topic without someone having to commit a felony.
       Moreover, we can't just talk about Snowden as a "whistleblower" in
       the abstract. He is a real human being who committed a series of
       specific actions.
       If we trust Glenn Greenwald - and I know, that's not the most
       reliable source - Snowden stole documents that could endanger the
       security of our country which he is keeping for "insurance." He
       stole documents and gave them to Greenwald that were so sensitive
       even Greenwald (still) doesn't want to print him. We still don't
       know how much he has told the Russians and the Chinese. We still
       don't know whether some foreign governments have gotten ahold of
       the documents he stole. (If you think these governments are helping
       him out out of the goodness of their heart, you are crazy.) We
       still don't know how much he has damaged the security of the U.S.
       These are all open questions, and until they are answered, it's
       silly to say, "Snowden's awesome, because he sparked a debate."
       If Snowden had just stolen one document - the Verizon court order
       on phone metadata - we would still have had the debate we are
       having, and he wouldn't be in as much trouble he is currently in.
       Then he could make a fair case that all he was doing was
       whistle-blowing. The fact that he went farther than that, and stole
       dangerous documents simply for "insurance," and that it's possible
       those documents have fallen into the hands of some of the most
       amoral actors on the world stage, is what troubles so many people
       about his case and his behavior.
          + [117]Jay Rosen says:
            [118]August 7, 2013 at 11:07 am
            "It is possible to think that it's good to have more openness
            about our national security apparatus, without approving of
            what Snowden did."
            Maybe so. But it is not tenable, if you're a journalist, to
            think it's great to have the debate that Snowden's actions are
            directly responsible for, and think that Snowden should not
            have taken those actions. This is the mindless position Jeffry
            Toobin worked himself into.
               o gorilla cookies says:
                 [119]August 7, 2013 at 11:20 am
                 >>Maybe so. But it is not tenable, if you're a
                 journalist, to think it's great to have the debate that
                 Snowden's actions are directly responsible for, and think
                 that Snowden should not have taken those actions. This is
                 the mindless position Jeffry Toobin worked himself
                 into.>>
                 Maybe so? Definitely so! You call people who disagree
                 with you "mindless," but you don't seem to have thought
                 this through.
                 This is a gruesome analogy, but the events in Newtown
                 sparked a debate on gun control. The debate was a good
                 thing to have. The actions that led to them were not.
                 You are saying that journalists have to approve of what
                 Snowden did because his actions "stirred a debate." Many
                 things stir a debate. The Iraq war stirred a debate.
                 Right-wing ranting on immigration stirs a debate. That
                 doesn't mean it's good.
                 Here are two questions:
                 - Could this discussion have come about without Snowden
                 committing a felony?
                 - Is it possible to disagree with Snowden's actions
                 because he did things that went above and beyond simply
                 informing the public?
                 The answer to the first question is obviously yes, since
                 this subject has been in the press before.
                 The answer to the second question is yes as well. If all
                 you are after is whistle-blowing, you don't steal
                 documents that could endanger the security of this
                 country as "insurance."
                 Again, if Snowden had taken different actions - just
                 stolen one or two documents, instead of the large number
                 of apparently sensitive things he stole - he might be in
                 better shape, and we would still be having the same
                 discussions.
                 These aren't complicated things, they are issues that go
                 to the heart of the charges against Snowden.
                    # Mutex7 says:
                      [120]August 7, 2013 at 12:38 pm
                      Your bias is obvious so let me start by laying out
                      mine. I believe that the US government, by which I
                      mean all three branches, the military and the
                      included bureaucracies have, either knowingly or
                      unknowingly, committed treason (by which I mean
                      violated their oath to defend and protect
                      Constitution) in their pursuit of safety and
                      stability. You might try to argue that this
                      so-called treason is necessary and justifiable...as
                      some have done by simplistically quoting `the
                      Constitution is not a suicide pact'.
                      The reason I say "simplistically" is because, in
                      this age when language is used to support an agenda
                      rather than truthfully communicate (and everything
                      depends on discovering what the meaning of the word
                      `is' is) we need to more fully examine the purposes
                      for which we require said level of "safety and
                      stability". Once we dismiss the transparently
                      ridiculous `we are good and they are evil' paradigm
                      and examine the details of the `war on terror' it
                      becomes obvious that it is nothing more than the
                      unwinnable (albeit long and drawn out) struggle of a
                      dying empire to maintain its hold on power. A power
                      supported (until recently) in large part by the
                      pretense of our desire to spread `freedom and
                      democracy'. A pretense which has now been betrayed
                      by the reality of US support for corrupt,
                      illegitimate regimes which historically have done
                      its dirty work for it.
                      This was Osama bin Laden's primary
                      contribution...that the source of the oppression and
                      injustice, from which billions of people cry out for
                      relief, is not so much the puppet dictators but
                      rather the puppet master...and by extension the
                      corporate elite it serves. The reason so many well
                      meaning people have difficulty making a coherent
                      argument against this police state is that they
                      refuse to acknowledge the length and breadth this
                      lie known as the `war on terror' represents. History
                      repeatedly shows us that the most powerful tools of
                      government are fear and hatred. These tools are most
                      commonly exploited by our innate fear of the
                      `other'. It doesn't matter whether it is communism,
                      socialism, fascism, terrorism or some other as yet
                      unnamed `ism' it is all just the same recycled
                      propaganda the powerful have used to exploit the
                      powerless since man first organized into groups. As
                      soon as you establish two or more groups you create
                      `us' and `them'. Combine this with ambitious men and
                      you have all the ingredients needed for exploitation
                      to succeed. It has been framed many ways throughout
                      the ages but it really does come down to the "red
                      pill/blue pill" choice. If you are lucky enough to
                      be born amongst the `haves' keep your head down,
                      don't ask many questions and life is good. If you
                      are unlucky enough to be born amongst the `have
                      nots' (or with a conscience) however your choices
                      are not so simple.
               o [121]Jay Rosen says:
                 [122]August 7, 2013 at 11:56 am
                 "Could this discussion have come about without Snowden
                 committing a felony?"
                 Yes, if the surveillance state has released the necessary
                 information, like the FISA court order permitting bulk
                 collection of all phone records, which was not known
                 about before, and not public, but since the surveillance
                 state did no such thing, then no.
                 "Is it possible to disagree with Snowden's actions
                 because he did things that went above and beyond simply
                 informing the public?"
                 Yes. If you mean agreeing with some of what he did (to
                 inform the public) and disagreeing with other things he
                 did.
                 And I don't call people who disagree with me "mindless"
                 because they disagree with me. I used that term
                 "mindless" in reference to a specific reply in a specific
                 situation Toobin found himself in, where he advanced a
                 contradictory argument without showing any awareness of
                 it. It's not a general epithet tossed out on a whim.
                    # gorilla cookies says:
                      [123]August 7, 2013 at 12:15 pm
                      >>Yes, if the surveillance state has released the
                      necessary information, like the FISA court order
                      permitting bulk collection of all phone records,
                      which was not known about before, and not public,
                      but since the surveillance state did no such thing,
                      then no.>>
                      Come on. Just about all of this information had been
                      reported on previously, if not released in its raw
                      form. Everyone agrees to this. There have been books
                      on the NSA. Snowden just caught people's attention,
                      in part because of the fugitive angle, which his
                      supporters regularly disdain.
                      Another question is: Did Snowden have to commit a
                      felony to get the debate he says he wanted? Could he
                      have stolen a lot less than he did, and therefore
                      not face the jail sentence he is facing now? Should
                      he have consulted a lawyer (and not Glenn
                      Greenwald)?
                      And yes, you can agree with some of Snowden's
                      actions and disagree with others. The question is:
                      do the negatives outweigh the positives?
                      You are arguing to be against Snowden is to be
                      against openness. Nonsense.
                      We still don't know what Snowden stole, and what
                      damage his actions have done or will do. We don't
                      know what he gave to Russia and China. Those are all
                      open, and very troubling, questions.
                      But they are why Toobin and others can think it's
                      good to have more discussion and sunlight, but not
                      approve of what Snowden did. The premise of your
                      piece was that was impossible and "mindless." Now
                      you say it "may be" possible to hold both those
                      points of view. Trust me. It is.
                    # [124]Jay Rosen says:
                      [125]August 7, 2013 at 12:31 pm
                      "Catching everyone's attention" by releasing
                      documents that show what's going on was, yes, part
                      of the logic of Snowden's actions. And it succeeded.
                      The reason that Congress is now considering changes
                      to bring more transparency to the process, or even
                      possibly cut off funding for bulk collection, is not
                      because of the sexy "fugitive angle," it is a direct
                      result of what Snowden did.
                      Final attempt, since you seem determined to misstate
                      my view on this. In my view it remains mindless --
                      that is, without good sense or logic -- for Jeffrey
                      Toobin as a journalist to condemn Snowden and reject
                      his actions in the terms he did, and also welcome
                      the debate that sprung from those actions, while at
                      the same time praising Greenwald for investigative
                      reporting. It is possible for a hypothetical
                      observer to object to some of the things Snowden did
                      and also welcome that debate, but I wasn't writing
                      about a hypothetical observer when I used the term
                      "mindlessly" (adverb, you converted it to an
                      adjective) about a specific moment in a specific
                      exchange on a specific television program. Good day,
                      sir.
                         @ gorilla cookies says:
                           [126]August 7, 2013 at 3:04 pm
                           I agree that we are starting to repeat
                           ourselves, but now you are saying that it isn't
                           that just the fact that Toobin disapproves of
                           what Snowden did, you just don't like his
                           terminology. In your post, you note that Toobin
                           called Snowden a criminal. By any standard, he
                           is. What problem do you have with that?
                           Anyway, you are now saying that you just have
                           an issue with one Snowden critic (Toobin),
                           rather than all of them (though if I'm not
                           mistaken, you call them "statists" in a tweet).
                           But we're not talking hypothetical observers
                           here. There are plenty of people who think we
                           need, say, FISA reform but are turned off by
                           Snowden's overall action. Just because some of
                           the ends may be good doesn't mean we have to
                           justify all of his means.
                           The larger point, and this was an issue in both
                           the Manning and now Snowden cases, is that we
                           are now in a world where people can steal large
                           amounts of confidential information very
                           easily. Should journalists (and groups like
                           Wikileaks) encourage that? If someone steals a
                           whole bunch of documents, and some of them are
                           valuable information for the public to know,
                           and some of them put people's lives at risk, is
                           that a good thing, or a bad thing? And how do
                           journalistic organizations balance the public's
                           right to know versus real national security
                           needs?
                           These aren't easy issues, as much as some
                           people would like to paint them as such. And
                           anyone who does is, dare i say it, "mindless."
                         @ Joseph Dillard says:
                           [127]August 8, 2013 at 2:22 am
                           Can you have democracy without the consent of
                           the governed? I think not. The issue here is
                           that, because what has happened lacks the
                           consent of the governed in any sense that is
                           justifiable, whether the United States remains
                           a democracy. On that issue, the burden of proof
                           is on the security state, and as far as I can
                           tell, it has no proof. Consequently, it is
                           slowly dawning on people that the United States
                           is something other than a democracy and the
                           debate is what to call what it has become.
               o Fred Brack says:
                 [128]August 8, 2013 at 12:08 am
                 As a retired newspaperman ("journalist" always seemed
                 like such a high-falutin' term to me, one employed by
                 people seeking social status) . . .
                 Reset: As a retired newspaperman I am always amused and
                 annoyed by so-called "journalists" proclaiming, ex
                 cathedra, what other journalists ought to think, or say.
                 When I was a kid, the response to such lofty
                 proclamations was, "Who made you Pope?"
                 That question is appropriate in the context of Jay
                 Rosen's post. To be clear, my comment says nothing about
                 my opinion of the merits of Professor Rosen's or Jeffrey
                 Toobin's positions. By all means lets discuss and argue
                 points of view. But lets do that without trying to kick
                 someone else out of the club, out of a phantom
                 "profession."
                 One of the pleasures I found in newspapering was I wasn't
                 in a club policed by self-appointed busybodies.
                    # [129]Jay Rosen says:
                      [130]August 8, 2013 at 12:53 am
                      Nobody is kicking anybody out of any club in this
                      post. But thank you for you concern.
                         @ Fred Brack says:
                           [131]August 8, 2013 at 3:29 am
                           When, Professor Rosen, you write " . . . it is
                           not tenable, if you're a journalist, to think .
                           . ." it sure sounds like you have appointed
                           yourself as the bouncer at the Celestial Press
                           Club. It's possible to disagree with Toobin
                           without implying that, as a journalist, he is
                           required to think in a certain way -- in fact,
                           to think like you do. We're all familiar with
                           enforcers patrolling the boundaries of
                           political parties or religions. "Journalism,"
                           in my experience, happily knows no boundaries.
                           Thanks to the First Amendment, in this country
                           anyone can call herself/himself a journalist
                           and think whatever she/he wants, irrespective
                           of what some snooty professor says. There's no
                           journalism governing body.
                           Gripped by your passion for this subject,
                           professor, you simply strayed over a line.
                           Concede that and get on with the central
                           debate.
                         @ [132]Jay Rosen says:
                           [133]August 8, 2013 at 8:51 am
                           You're the one doing the policing here.
                           But we can agree on this: "Thanks to the First
                           Amendment, in this country anyone can call
                           herself/himself a journalist and think whatever
                           she/he wants, irrespective of what some snooty
                           professor says."
                         @ Fred Brack says:
                           [134]August 8, 2013 at 12:04 pm
                           By agreeing with my statement "in this country
                           anyone can call herself/himself a journalist
                           and think whatever she/he wants," professor,
                           you have implicitly conceded my point that you
                           were high-handed in ruling that "it is not
                           tenable, if you're a journalist, to think (so
                           and so)." That, in other words, a journalist
                           must, absolutely must, think in a certain way
                           or she/he is not a journalist. You just can't
                           bring yourself to make your concession
                           explicit, resorting instead to the schoolyard
                           taunt, "I'm rubber you're glue."
                           Nevertheless, I detect some progress here. I
                           suspect next time you criticize someone, as you
                           did Jeffrey Toobin, for inconsistencies, or
                           contradictions, or cognitive dissonance, you'll
                           avoid any implications that journalists must
                           think a certain way or they're not true
                           journalists.
                           Now let's get on with the vital, never-ending
                           discussion about conflicts among the American
                           values of national security, government
                           secrecy, and personal privacy.
                         @ [135]Jay Rosen says:
                           [136]August 8, 2013 at 1:51 pm
                           Okay, officer.
                         @ gorilla cookies says:
                           [137]August 8, 2013 at 9:35 pm
                           Fred raises an important issue about how
                           Greenwald and his minions treat the issues
                           here.
                           The implication I constantly hear (and to some
                           extent, Jay, in his comment) from Snowden-fans
                           is that a REAL journalist would never criticize
                           Snowden - or Manning, or Assange, or whoever
                           the martyr-of-the-week is-and that everyone who
                           does is simply a courtier of the rich and
                           powerful. Greenwald and his fans engage in some
                           kind of variation of this almost daily.
                           To me, this is just a slimy and juvenile tactic
                           that aims to shut down debate and dialog, to
                           "shame" critics of Snowden and try and make
                           certain criticism out of bounds. It also
                           personalizes things unnecessarily -- why not
                           just argue these issues on the merits? Why
                           bring someone's job into this? Journalists
                           criticize each other all the time. Jeffrey
                           Toobin has every right to his opinion. It
                           doesn't make him any less of a journalist.
                           I have always felt journalists can and should
                           be encouraged to develop their own thoughts and
                           opinions, and not walk in lockstep with anyone,
                           whether it's Snowden or Greenwald or Obama or
                           the NSA or me or you. A hallmark of being a
                           good journalist is independent thought. The
                           hallmark of a bad one is trying to shut that
                           down.
                         @ [138]Jay Rosen says:
                           [139]August 8, 2013 at 10:04 pm
                           Jeffrey Toobin-on TV constantly, with a
                           megaphone 1,000 times bigger than this blog-has
                           every right to his views on Snowden (linked to
                           here in the After Matter section: check it
                           out), and I have every right to criticize him.
                           No one said any different, and nothing in my
                           post suggests any different.
                           This is a crap complaint, but the type of crap
                           that comes from people who won't sign their
                           names or risk their reputations by making it.
                           In other words, standard online behavior.
                         @ gorilla cookies says:
                           [140]August 9, 2013 at 8:01 am
                           Jay, you are now swatting at straw-men. I never
                           said you didn't have a right to criticize
                           Toobin; I just didn't like the terms you did it
                           in. That's my right as well. Anyone who has a
                           fundamental understanding of journalism knows
                           that it is about independent thought. For Jay
                           to say "as a journalist," Toobin should think
                           in a specific way, is to me a betrayal to
                           everything good journalism should be about.
                           Toobin's opinions on Snowden make him no less a
                           journalist, just as John Lewis' (correct)
                           opinion on Snowden make him no less a civil
                           rights icon.
                           Anyway, Jay, there was a person in this thread
                           who used his real name and objected to this
                           very thing, and you treated him just as snidely
                           and dismissively. So please focus less of ad
                           homenin attacks, and more on substance.
                    # joe says:
                      [141]August 8, 2013 at 6:01 am
                      Aw shucks, you're just a giant chicken lawyer from
                      the countryside. (See Futurama for an explanation).
                      You gonna tell us next how Jay is one of those East
                      Coast liberal elites sipping latte while oppressin'
                      the heartland with his elitism?
                      When you can't win the argument, make the debate
                      itself an attack on your identity. Talk about PC.
                         @ [142]Michael Murry says:
                           [143]August 8, 2013 at 3:11 pm
                           Agreed. Personally, the adjective "snooty"
                           pretty much gave away the whole
                           offended-salt-of-the-earth-regular-guy thing.
                         @ Fred Brack says:
                           [144]August 8, 2013 at 3:40 pm
                           Nothing I've said in my exchanges with
                           Professor Rosen could possibly have given you
                           any clues, Joe, as to my political views or
                           geographic location. (In fact, I'm an
                           ultra-liberal who's lived on both coasts.) I
                           merely chided the professor for claiming
                           authority to say what a "journalist" could and
                           should think. Unable to defend his implicit
                           claim to such authority, he resorted to
                           childishness. Now you come along, Joe, and
                           stick your nose in by implying I'm some sort of
                           conservative yahoo.
                           Guess I learned my lesson not to blunder into
                           the comment thread on this blog.
                         @ Fred Brack says:
                           [145]August 8, 2013 at 3:59 pm
                           "Snooty" was meant to be playfully ironic.
                           "Badges? We journalists don't need no stinkin'
                           badges!"
                           In other words, the First Amendment grants no
                           authority to thought police. By implying that
                           Jeffrey Toobin was barred, by virtue of being a
                           journalist, from thinking anything other than
                           what Professor Rosen thought, I concluded the
                           professor was trying to enforce non-existent
                           thought boundaries.
                         @ joe says:
                           [146]August 13, 2013 at 8:46 am
                           You're "ultra-liberal" huh? That's the worst
                           kind of conservative -- the one who starts out
                           by implying in that statement that his sort of
                           conservatism is the farthest bounds of
                           acceptable thought.
                           That's though policing for ya. Not arguing that
                           a certain logic is incorrect or incoherent, but
                           implying that those who disagree with you are
                           "hard X" or "uncivil" or some such nonsense.
                           Dude, you're the one whining about
                           "self-appointed busybodies", implying that
                           folks are getting uppity, and such nonsense --
                           and then are following it up by being offended
                           when you get called on it.
                           I find it hard to take anything you say
                           seriously when it follows such a transparent
                           pattern of concern trolling. Classic in fact --
                           maybe this thread should be put on the wiki
                           page for it.
                           But it is in fact insulting to use such
                           venerable rhetorical techniques, as if folks
                           fell for it. Snooty indeed.
                           I'm amazed by the intensity of the propaganda
                           that even bring up this subject activates. Is
                           it all volunteer? That last is an honest
                           question -- it goes to the question of how
                           deranged our communicational networks have
                           become by the collapse in meaning by techniques
                           such as the one discussed in this posting.
   13. [147]Hugh Sansom says:
       [148]August 7, 2013 at 11:04 am
       Several questions or points (apologies for the length):
       1. Despite the appearance of contradiction (and while there is a
       tension), one can be consistent in thinking that the debate
       resulting from Snowden's leaks is good although Snowden's actions
       themselves are bad.
       Jeffrey Toobin seems conservative to me. He certainly falls within
       the spectrum of standard American thinking where actions are
       justified instrumentally -- by virtue of the good outcomes those
       actions produce. (The most dogmatically held example of this in the
       US is the conviction that enormous inequality is justified by the
       `trickle down' effect.) So if the debate resulting from Snowden's
       actions is a good thing, Toobin must believe there is some
       overriding negative outcome that makes Snowden's actions bad. This
       could be a coherent argument, but neither Toobin nor others
       attacking Snowden make it because there is little real argument nor
       any wish for such in the mainstream about Snowden.
       My suspicion regarding Toobin's (and others') distress over
       Snowden's leaks is threefold:
       a. Toobin and many journalists, scholars, observers like him (e.g.,
       Matt Yglesias, Chris Hayes, David Gregory, etc.) deeply, personally
       identify with power, especially Washington ("This Town", as Mark
       Leibovich has described). They have powerful incentives to do so;
       their wellbeing as pilot fish depends on that of the sharks.
       b. They therefore see criticism of Obama or the US government as
       criticism of themselves.
       c. They are profoundly unable to conceive of the possibility that
       American leaders, in government or business, might be guilty of
       really awful wrongdoing. This is why years ago, for example, Toobin
       could casually attack OJ Simpson before the facts were in, but
       cannot criticize any American leader, like Obama, as a plausible
       candidate for war crimes charges.
       Snowden or Wikileaks generate cognitive dissonance for the Toobins
       in America. They resolve the dissonance with just-so stories that
       exonerate American power. If they actually thought about it, they
       could construct a coherent argument. They are unaccustomed to doing
       so because the US culture is one that bitterly rejects challenges
       to power, fashion, wealth, fame.
       2. "[D]emocracy here at home must be balanced against the
       requirements of security." What would be the response to: "Security
       here at home must be balanced against the requirements of
       democracy"? The notion that democracy brings demands seems to have
       been lost.
       3. How would Obama or Sen. Feinstein or any of those who endlessly
       defend government abuses react if there were a broad, deep public
       demand for democracy, defense of rights, and an end to massive
       surveillance? If we have not already reached the point of no
       return, we are rapidly approaching one where a surge in public
       opposition would provoke a constitutional crisis worse than that
       seen in the Civil War. The crisis will likely never arise because
       the public is so misinformed, so deceived, and so dogmatic in its
       faithful attachment to American power that the demand will never be
       made.
       Lest this seem like conspiracy theorizing or just handwaving,
       recall that in the Nixon years, calls by some within the
       administration for more troops in Vietnam were opposed because it
       was thought those troops might be needed in the US to quell
       domestic unrest. Recall also that both Bush and Obama made legal
       moves that would, in principle, undermine posse comitatus and allow
       use of US troops within the US.
       4. Despite racist hostility to Obama or malicious GOP opposition to
       anything Democratic, Americans are still overwhelmingly of the view
       that we owe obedience to political leaders. Americans identify the
       powerful in America with America itself. And they suffer under the
       delusion that they, any day now, will win the lottery and join the
       powerful.
          + Mutex7 says:
            [149]August 7, 2013 at 2:54 pm
            Excellent comments and insight. This entire debate depends on
            whether you see the US government as controlled by inherently
            good and trustworthy people or whether you believe, as the
            founding fathers did, that all rule by man is inevitably
            fraught with danger and therefore opted for the rule of law
            and its incumbent restriction on the power of our
            representatives. Lost in all this debate over the expediency
            of surveillance `for our protection' is that our entire legal
            system is predicated on the presumption of innocence and the
            belief that it is better to let a hundred criminals
            potentially go free than to punish men for crimes they didn't
            commit.
            It is for this reason all of these activities need to couched
            and defended under the terms of war...buy the premise, buy the
            bit. This debate is necessarily predicated on the distortion
            of language. We have taken a word like `war' which had been
            understood to have a particular meaning for the entire history
            of mankind and twisted it into being a worldwide conflict
            against a nebulous enemy, which can't surrender and, of which,
            we continue to create more. The `war on terror' is the
            perpetual motion machine of conflicts. Even Rumsfeld once had
            the insight to ask whether we aren't creating more
            `terrorists' than we are killing or capturing. Perhaps this
            misses the point though. In a military industrial complex,
            dependent on war for profit, perhaps the whole idea is to
            never run out of `terrorists'.
            We live in a nonsensical world where the executive branch
            needs a warrant to wiretap an American citizen but can kill
            this very same citizen without approval from any court simply
            by declaring him a terrorist. It's like `the emperor's new
            clothes' meets `the twilight zone' as people twist themselves
            into knots to keep from acknowledging reality.
               o [150]Michael Murry says:
                 [151]August 8, 2013 at 3:20 pm
                 "It's like `the emperor's new clothes' meets `the
                 twilight zone' as people twist themselves into knots to
                 keep from acknowledging reality."
                 In some ways, yes. But to me the bureaucratic overreach
                 and petty vindictive bungling has for its cause
                 substantial elements of Parkinson's Law meeting the Peter
                 Principle: namely, that the work will expand to fill the
                 time allotted for its completion while everyone involved
                 rises to their level of incompetence.
   14. Gabriel Meyr says:
       [152]August 7, 2013 at 11:24 am
       Good article. But how can you start it off by saying you're "not
       pro-Snowden or anti-Snowden"? Looks like your commitment to
       objectivity uselessly contradicts the conclusions you draw later in
       the piece.
          + [153]Jay Rosen says:
            [154]August 7, 2013 at 11:36 am
            You're reading more into it than is there, and ignoring my
            qualification. The sentence reads, "I am not pro-Snowden or
            anti-Snowden, because to put it that way unnecessarily
            personalizes the issue." The point I am trying to make is that
            I don't think Snowden, yay! or Snowden, boo! is a good way of
            arguing about this case. My views are more complicated than
            that. And whether he's a hero, a narcissist, a creep, etc.
            clouds the issue.
            I think he took a principled action in trying to alert the
            public about the overreaches of the NSA. I think the debate
            that's followed from his actions has been a good thing, a
            necessary thing. And I believe those views are made
            sufficiently clear in this post. I'm not ready to defend
            everything he has done or said. I might be critical of part of
            it, and agree with the rest of it. Thus: not pro, or anti.
            I'm not claiming any sort of "objectivity," a word you
            imported. I'm trying to elude crude categories that don't help
            us and don't express my thoughts on the matter.
               o D Davies says:
                 [155]August 9, 2013 at 2:23 am
                 Mr Snowden did "take a principled action" but there's
                 something more, which, I think, the word "service"
                 describes. Service to one's fellows is based in love. It
                 took me the better part of two weeks before I recognized,
                 was struck by and then overwhelmed by Mr Snowden's
                 expressive action. I continue to be awed by the
                 singularity of it.
   15. Bob Lippman says:
       [156]August 7, 2013 at 1:03 pm
       Missing in this discussion is this: the effect on the many decent
       individuals engaged in this overreach who are aware that it is not
       only unlawful but also unethical.
   16. Lance says:
       [157]August 7, 2013 at 1:12 pm
       Excellent piece.
       You may want to dig in one step further though:
       what is electronic surveillance, in effect, used for - in the first
       place ?
       (I know: this is not the question you raised.)
       But as far as I know and as far as it is documented, electronic
       surveillance is used primarily for PROTECTION. So what's wrong with
       protection ? Heck who would not protect himself or his/her loved
       ones ? This is so strong an argument that there is almost no
       dissent -- the consent is almost obvious and your question
       "Can there even be an informed public and consent-of-the-governed
       for decisions about electronic surveillance, or have we put those
       principles aside so that the state can have its freedom to
       maneuver?"
       is only about the details of that protection that the state/the
       government/the mafia gang - oops sorry cross that out- provides
       you. Should you be privy to those details or not ? It probably
       depends on your level of closeness to the state/the government,
       etc.
       But -- as you climb up the ladder -- you discover the obvious: the
       essence of protection and the absolute necessity of electronic
       surveillance. The state definitely needs to protect itself FROM US.
       This is what you call "the state's freedom to maneuver". And the
       extreme majority of the use of electronic surveillance is exactly
       this: to protect the state (and those who run it, I am not talking
       of you and me) against its own citizens.
       So maybe the time is ripe for a real debate on what kind of society
       we want to live in. Or maybe not. Isn't it what your question was
       actually all about ?
       Sorry if I read in too much your piece. :-) Anyway I liked it.
          + [158]Jay Rosen says:
            [159]August 7, 2013 at 1:26 pm
            "So maybe the time is ripe for a real debate on what kind of
            society we want to live in. Or maybe not. Isn't it what your
            question was actually all about ?"
            Yes, pretty much. I was trying to write about a debate we
            should be having, but what we're not because we don't want to
            face it.
   17. Reader says:
       [160]August 7, 2013 at 2:19 pm
       Excellent analysis sir. One question, it is often implied that
       legislators who are appalled by the constitutional violations are
       prevented from disclosing the details of the violations in the
       legislature. Is this true in a legal sense? Is there some feature
       of the intel committees that trumps parliamentary privilege?
          + [161]Jay Rosen says:
            [162]August 7, 2013 at 2:36 pm
            I linked to an article by a constitutional law scholar on that
            question but I will repeat it:
            "It's time for Congress to use its freedom of speech power to
            force the intelligence debate out into the open...."
            [163]http://goo.gl/ommbdS
               o Ross says:
                 [164]August 8, 2013 at 11:44 pm
                 a good link (I hope people will follow it), and to a
                 crucial piece of the Constitution I had always wondered
                 about but never seen a treatment of until this.
   18. bmwahlen says:
       [165]August 7, 2013 at 2:28 pm
       These arguments are unnecessarily complicated...the truth (as
       always) is quite simple: The NSA and all its eves dropping software
       is just a high tech tool by which criminals, mass murderers,
       warmongers, fraudsters and the like-keep one step ahead of justice.
       That's all.
   19. Jeanne Schork says:
       [166]August 7, 2013 at 3:05 pm
       Why could Senators Udall and Weyden have not taken advantage of the
       immunity that Senator Mike Gravel invoked when he read the PENTAGON
       PAPERS into THE CONGRESSIONAL RECORD?
          + [167]Jay Rosen says:
            [168]August 7, 2013 at 3:33 pm
            This is the web, people. Learn to use it. They probably could
            have done that, as [169]this link (which was provided in my
            post and again in the comment thread) suggests.
               o D Davies says:
                 [170]August 8, 2013 at 7:46 am
                 Members of the House and Senate should IMO get on this
                 immediately. It is deplorable to witness irresponsible
                 public servants dithering around while young people like
                 Bradley Manning and Edward Snowden sacrifice themselves
                 doing the job our representatives were elected to do. I
                 am disgusted.
                    # Lance says:
                      [171]August 8, 2013 at 1:06 pm
                      Point taken.
   20. ralph scenic says:
       [172]August 7, 2013 at 3:37 pm
       When I visited the Soviet Union, in 80's, I asked a russian I met
       what he thought about the soviet media. His answer was - simple we
       just believe the opposite of what they say. That's the same
       response that I now give about USG and msm.
          + Spring Texan says:
            [173]August 7, 2013 at 10:22 pm
            Sadly, that seems like a VERY sensible rule.
            They just can't or won't stop lying.
          + joe says:
            [174]August 13, 2013 at 8:54 am
            What always impressed me by something like that is that "most"
            people knew precisely to read the opposite. Who were they
            lying to?
            That goes with the spying -- in fact, people are right that
            most people have nothing to fear. Most people even at the
            height of Soviet intrusiveness could live their lives
            normally, as they had nothing interesting to say and were no
            threat to anyone.
            It was Gorbachev, for example, who had to meet with his own
            advisors in wheat fields in Idaho on summit trips to have a
            conversation about reform. It wasn't the janitors at home
            making a joke, or a teacher having a fling on a vacation. And
            I'm sure that the latter two knew perfectly well what the real
            availability of chocolate was, and how the war in Afghanistan
            was really going (given which population produces draftees)
   21. xelcho says:
       [175]August 7, 2013 at 4:24 pm
       What you are discussing here is clearly a small part of a much
       bigger issue.
       How is meaningful to contemplate the NSA intelligence effort
       without first considering how our military is engaged around the
       world in various forms of violence or threats. Clearly the NSA
       would have us believe that their efforts dovetail nicely with the
       magnanimous efforts undertaken by the US military. What is the
       predictable result of these military mis-adventures? According
       Jemery Scahill and many many others it is simply to enlist more
       Muslim extremists, aka "terrorists". So the left arm (military and
       drone violence)is developing targets for the right arm (NSA) to
       "track". Really, this seems quite childish and uninteresting as it
       were as many politicians and defense contractors are simply
       siphoning off our economy. Meanwhile the level of hatred of the US
       is escalating to ever new heights...
       So why not open all of this to discussion? Why is there no debate
       of our entire military/intelligence system?
       What are the real goals, what are the tactics employed? If they are
       unable to survive public debate how can the public be expected to
       support it?
       X
          + Spring Texan says:
            [176]August 7, 2013 at 10:23 pm
            Yes, this is a very closely related question and gets at the
            heart of it all.
   22. TuffsNotEnuff says:
       [177]August 7, 2013 at 4:55 pm
       The first hoax related to NSA's PRISM and other spy-on-civilians
       programs is that NSA management controls what happens with the data
       they collect. Plainly, NSA and the White House have no idea how the
       computer systems work -- proven recently when they promised to
       restrict access to the (irrelevant) query front-end tools.
       This is quite a hoax. It also requires you to believe that NSA does
       not have direct access to emails and other communications.
       "Direct," maybe not. Indirectly through three-hop data stores at
       the ISPs -- that's what Snowden describes. NSA has to have full
       linguistic indexes to the ISP archives and that's how the techs can
       get to anything in seconds.
       There is a second hoax. That one presents a claim that the Obama
       White House is accurately informed and controls what happens with
       these NSA systems. No way.
       Obama's statements make it clear that he has no idea that NSA has
       indexed the ISP archives and grabs emails/comm data with no
       restraints. NSA uses a "hot pursuit" equivalent Order from the FISA
       court. That makes anything and everything arguably legal. Obama has
       no idea why building linguistic indexes remotely -- at the ISPs,
       not at NSA -- is critical to implement this three-hop spy system.
       As in the dark as Obama is, don't imagine that G.W. Bush did any
       better. NSA made up a story and they have told it to every elected
       official from 2004 to present. In their own minds, the NSA managers
       have verbal constructs that avoid lying, while they mislead all of
       the elected Fools.
       Finally, where's analysis of the down side risks of having these
       systems in place ??? What was the FBI Special Agent doing with
       9,000,000 citizens' records on his laptop? Was he out shopping them
       at $ 0.10 a pop? What happens when the White House gets a president
       matched to Aaron Burr, J. Edgar Hoover, or Dick Cheney? Corporate
       media hasn't said a word about the down side.
   23. Michiel Jonker says:
       [178]August 7, 2013 at 5:14 pm
       Gorilla Cookies writes in his last contribution: "The larger point,
       and this was an issue in both the Manning and now Snowden cases, is
       that we are now in a world where people can steal large amounts of
       confidential information very easily."
       Yes, that is exactly what the NSA, GCHQ etc. are doing.
       Gorilla Cookies continues: "Should journalists (and groups like
       Wikileaks) encourage that?"
       The answer is: no, of course they should not encourage such
       criminal spying on millions of innocent citizens. And luckily, they
       don´t encourage it, but expose it.
       Mr. Gorilla Cookies deplores the fact that Mr. Snowden has broken
       certain laws, and that some journalists make use of this to make
       governmental violations of the American constitution known to a
       large public. He seems to suggest that such journalistic actions,
       although not illegal, are illegitimate.
       I disagree with that. "Laws" that prescribe secrecy about
       governmental criminality, and which have on top of that been put
       into force without the consent of a majority of well-informed,
       non-bribed representatives of a well-informed public, are not laws,
       but a form of omerta - the obligation of mafia participants to be
       silent. Even when such "laws" are "legal" in a formalistic sense,
       they are not legitimate laws.
       In imperial China, the emperor had a "Mandate of Heaven". In
       absolutist France (before the French Revolution), the Kings
       regarded themselves as being appointed by God. But even the Mandate
       of Heaven could be lost. And we all know what happened to the
       French kings after they had ignored the well-being of their "99%"
       (OK, "5%") for too long. Mr. Gorilla Cookies seems to be interested
       only in maintaining a facade of paper laws covering up for
       illegitimate mafia laws, but not in really legitimate laws and
       their effective implementation.
       What I miss in this discussion, is the fact that this is not about
       a balance between security and democracy, but about a balance
       between, on the one hand, insecurity as a result of a (partly
       self-created) risk of terrorism, and, on the other hand, insecurity
       as a result of a derailed, uncontrolled regime at home.
       Well-informed democracy is not one side of such a balance, but the
       best insurance against both kinds of insecurity.
       For all I know, Mr. Snowden has acted so far as a true
       whistleblower: only divulging information that is relevant to the
       abuses he wanted to draw attention to. The question is not whether
       Snowden has done too much - it is quite obvious that without his
       strategy of enabling journalists to publish pieces of information
       over a longer stretch of time, his actions would not have been
       effective, in view of all the lies and other power abuse that are
       applied in order to suppress his message. The question is whether
       Snowden has done ENOUGH to create a serious chance to bring back
       democracy and the rule of law to North America and Europe.
       As for newspapers and journalists... so far, only a few of them are
       drawing their readers´ attention to what is really at stake here.
       It is a hopeful miracle that in spite of the massive political
       efforts to befuddle us, more and more people are becoming conscious
       of the significance of this issue.
   24. Marmalade says:
       [179]August 7, 2013 at 6:24 pm
       Could you change `imprimatur' to `nihil obstat' in the article?
       Imprimatur and nihil obstat were printed in books authorised by a
       bishop of the Catholic church - imprimatur means `it may be
       printed', and `nihil obstat' means `let no one hinder [the book
       appearing]`. In the sentence where imprimatur is used, the author
       meant just `permission', and here `consent to keep secrets' which
       makes `imprimatur' a nonsense, or a very sick piece of irony
       indeed. Its too subtle a point to be an anticatholic slur, more
       likely just ignorance of the terms and their usage. Please consider
       a correction to make it make sense.
          + [180]Jay Rosen says:
            [181]August 7, 2013 at 6:47 pm
            I'm sorry, but I don't run corrections over other people's
            prose.
   25. DesertBunny says:
       [182]August 7, 2013 at 6:53 pm
       Toobin Principle=Toobinthink,a variation on Doublethink.
          + TuffsNotEnuff says:
            [183]August 7, 2013 at 7:55 pm
            Toobin leverages a hoax: "Snowden is a criminal" with his own
            assertion that pragmatism is irrelevant.
            These RWNJ hoaxes serve as containers for limitless numbers of
            lies and large numbers of arguments that fit to the Informal
            Fallacies. Caught iIn the act of serving this hoax, Toobin
            wants to present himself as a sympathetic person who favors
            Rule of Law. It's doublethink and stinking BS too.
   26. Dissent Now says:
       [184]August 7, 2013 at 10:07 pm
       Lol, Toobin. Pwned.
   27. joe says:
       [185]August 8, 2013 at 5:45 am
       Yes -- finally someone starts to get it.
       This mechanism of internal repression -- of questions that can not
       be asked -- is systematically crucial. Then you can have perfectly
       open discussions, as long as certain thoughts are off limit by
       definition.
       This is most obvious in the current case, where the issues are
       off-limit by secrecy, not just the details but the very policy
       questions themselves. But it's not limited to that -- there are a
       large number of political questions that will immediately brand you
       as disloyal and anti-American if you even ask them, make the
       informed consent necessary to claim democratic legitimacy extremely
       problematic.
       And to go further on this story, Reuters is now reporting that the
       DEA has been using NSA (and other illegal to use in court) tips
       since the 70s. After making their case, they go back and scrub the
       history, inventing an initial source distinct from the factual
       source so that they can make a court case. The IRS apparently has
       been involved in this as well.
       So, we're literally rewriting history so that the NSA-type spying
       can have judicially effectiveness. In fact, repressing our own
       legal memory.
       It's truly astounding. It's like the crazy-ass postmodernist
       nutcases were right all along. I'm expecting evil alien reptilian
       overlords to unmask themselves any day now.
   28. joe says:
       [186]August 8, 2013 at 6:34 am
       Oh, and look up Carl Schmitt, the legal theorist in Germany in the
       1930s. His idea about the state of exception, the power to limit
       democracy and thereby dispense with it except as a legal fiction,
       shows the danger of this kind of mechanism of self-repression.
   29. gezzerx says:
       [187]August 8, 2013 at 8:08 am
       "If you tell a lie big enough and keep repeating it, people will
       eventually come to believe it. The lie can be maintained only for
       such time as the State can shield the people from the political,
       economic and/or military consequences of the lie. It thus becomes
       vitally important for the State to use all of its powers to repress
       dissent, for the truth is the mortal enemy of the lie, and thus by
       extension, the truth is the greatest enemy of the State."
       Joseph Goebbels quote
       If you don't know who Joseph Goebbels was,Google him,you may be
       surprised who he was & what he did. Are we becoming what we once
       despised ? ? ?
   30. [188]The Toobin principle » Pressthink | Comments From The Peanut
       Gallery says:
       [189]August 8, 2013 at 12:39 pm
       [...] The Toobin principle » Pressthink [...]
   31. proximity1 says:
       [190]August 8, 2013 at 1:11 pm
       RE:

     "Disclosure: I am not pro-Snowden or anti-Snowden, because to put it
     that way unnecessarily personalizes the issue. I am not "for" the
     National Security Agency or against it. As a U.S. citizen I am
     implicated in what the NSA does, and I want it to succeed in
     discovering those who would harm us. My concern, as a writer and
     journalism professor, is with another fight: the one for public
     knowledge, for sunlight, for the facts to come out so we know what's
     going on. I am primarily interested in the journalism that Edward
     Snowden has set in motion, and the gains in public knowledge that
     have resulted from his actions, which I have called the Snowden
     effect. #
     The question that bothers me most can be put this way: #
     Can there even be an informed public and consent-of-the-governed for
     decisions about electronic surveillance, or have we put those
     principles aside so that the state can have its freedom to maneuver?
     (snip)
     ..."People who make a career in journalism cannot pretend to
     neutrality on a matter like that. If a free society needs them --
     and I think it does -- it needs them to stand strongly against the
     eclipse of informed consent."
       There's a great deal I agree with in your article-"Glenn Greenwald
       sent me."- and so, I'm puzzled over one point and would like to
       bring it up for more consideration.
       You've aptly noticed some important psychological dysfunctions in
       the rationalizing of many concerning the whole set of issues in
       what may be summarized as the Edward Snowden Whistle-blowing
       affair. I agree with those points you make in noticing that J.
       Toobin and Piers Morgan, cited, and so many others not cited, in
       effect do this: "Repeal the concept of an informed public, repress
       your decision to take such a drastic step."
       So I find it interesting that you, yourself, seem to have something
       of that in your own reasoning: where you find it necessary to place
       a disclaimer at the start, informing us that you are "not
       pro-Snowden or anti-Snowden."
       I don't understand that. Again, the whole point of "being
       `Pro-Snowden', after all, concerns specifically his public acts in
       which he divulged information showing apparent habitual official
       crimes to the press. It's for this that anyone who is an ordinary
       observer of public affairs knows about E. Snowden at all.
       Since he didn't become notable for some and notorious for others
       for any other reasons than these disclosures of apparent official
       criminal behavior, I can't see why one ought to, especially given
       your views, disclaim being "Pro-Snowden".
       I am `Pro-Snowden' because I approve of what Mr. Snowden did, and
       I'm Pro-Snowden out of respect for his conscientious acts, his
       moral stand, his courage to see, recognize and act on his moral
       understanding of the circumstances in which he found himself as an
       N.S.A. contract employee -with a working conscience.
       I don't understand how, except by doing a bit of psychological
       compartmentalizing, you are able to maintain both the views,
       highlighted above in boldface.
          + [191]Jay Rosen says:
            [192]August 8, 2013 at 2:01 pm
            I just don't think "pro-Snowden" is a good way of describing
            what I am pro. If it works for you in what you support, all
            good.
            I am not pretending to neutrality on the more vital matter of
            repealing the principle of an informed public. I am against
            that. I think it should be fought against- actively. And I
            think journalists should be in the forefront of that fight.
            Snowden's most important actions have been the ones that
            demonstrated what is at stake in what I have called the
            eclipse of informed consent. These are the views I hold that I
            am trying to make clear in this post. I hope that helps.
               o D Davies says:
                 [193]August 9, 2013 at 2:54 am
                 Being informed is of no value unless one is responsible,
                 which is where Americans seem to come unstuck. Too many
                 avoid responsibility at all costs, wildly abdicating it
                 to anyone who promises to relieve us of it.
                 Self-government is hard, time-consuming and exhausting. I
                 don't recall anyone saying it was going to be easy, just
                 worth it, because, as we are quickly finding out, being
                 exploited and discarded is not much fun.
                    # proximity1 says:
                      [194]August 9, 2013 at 10:18 am
                      "Being informed is of no value unless one is
                      responsible, which is where Americans seem to come
                      unstuck. Too many avoid responsibility at all costs,
                      wildly abdicating it to anyone who promises to
                      relieve us of it."
                      That is a very important insight-and so true. The
                      current ethos in English-speaking culture, most
                      pronounced in the U.S. version, is precisely this
                      which you describe. I call it the habit of "making a
                      `virtue' of any and everything which one believes,
                      rightly or wrongly `to be unavoidable'" and it runs
                      through and through popular opinion on topics of
                      great diversity. It is essentially a resigned
                      approach to the world, a surrender in advance of a
                      fight, apparently based on the easy refuge of
                      believing that "there is nothing anyone can do about
                      ..." (whatever the case may be). This is reinforced
                      in myriad was, in all sorts of popular mass
                      media-television, film, recent journalism and books
                      and, still more, all over the discussion fora of the
                      world wide web, which, as a force, do tremendous
                      social harm along with whatever incidental good
                      happens along the way.
               o proximity1 says:
                 [195]August 9, 2013 at 10:46 am
                 RE: "I just don't think "pro-Snowden" is a good way of
                 describing what I am pro. If it works for you in what you
                 support, all good."
                 I believe that these-'Pro-Snowden' and `pro-'his public
                 civic-minded actions' are, whether recognized or not, and
                 however inconvenient to our post-Englightenment morality,
                 inextricably connected, necessarily connected and I
                 believe that this connection is not only necessary, it's
                 for important reasons also `troublesome' and that this
                 troublesome aspect drives your taking pains to force a
                 distinction between the person (you won't avow an
                 approval for) and what the person did (which acts you do
                 avow approval for).
                 This is to take the individual actor and render him or
                 her an abstraction in some supposedly "larger story"; but
                 advocating such a distinction leaves us, I believe, in
                 exactly the same moral peril as those who are still
                 working in jobs such as Mr. Snowden had and who have read
                 the press, thought over the "issues" and concluded that
                 they're not implicated, since we may divorce a person
                 from his acts, each may find and make his own way as it
                 suits his own "personal" proclivities. That divorces the
                 moral import of acts from their intimately personal
                 connection with those who in fact act and, again, forgive
                 me repeating myself, this leaves us in precisely the sort
                 of situation which is so well and so easily exploited by
                 the very people who have made a target of Snowden
                 personally for what he took upon himself as an act of
                 moral conviction.
                 You, I think, ask of us to focus exclusively on the
                 conviction itself as an abstraction, and this lets all of
                 the rest of us who are and who have bene faced with
                 analogous moral dilemmas, from feeling intensely the
                 obligation to respond to the moral demands of our
                 consciences.
                 This, I think, is right at the heart of what is most
                 admirable about what Edward Snowden was able to do and
                 what the vast majority of us find beyond our abilities.
                 That is a post-Enlightenment view of moral
                 responsibility, in keeping with the way in which our
                 world has taken in so many respects a "depersonalized"
                 view of reality.
                 But, as any respectable Englightenment thinker would
                 argue, "No actor?, then no moral act."
                    # [196]Jay Rosen says:
                      [197]August 9, 2013 at 11:11 am
                      Thanks. Interesting.
                         @ Michiel Jonker says:
                           [198]August 9, 2013 at 11:47 am
                           Not just "interesting". Essential and vital.
                           Calling it "interesting" means that you
                           distance yourself from the moral implication of
                           what Proximity1 says, i.e. its implication for
                           YOU.
                           Snowden belongs to the small minority of people
                           who want their words and their acts to match
                           each other. That is, the small minority of
                           people who are not cynical or (wilfully) naive.
                           Snowden did not say: "It is interesting that I
                           am participating in unconstitutional acts that
                           threaten to eliminate democracy and the rule of
                           law." He chose not to be cynical, but to stop
                           doing the wrong thing.
                           In addition, he chose to do something about the
                           wrong thing, at great personal risk. This
                           changed him from a merely non-cynical, decent
                           person into a hero (OK, "we can´t all be
                           heroes"... oops, that is again a cynical thing
                           to say).
                           A good read on this is Peter Sloterdijk,
                           "Critique of Cynical Reason" (Kritik der
                           Zynischen Vernunft). First published in the
                           early eighties of the 20C, it is more relevant
                           than ever.
                         @ [199]Jay Rosen says:
                           [200]August 9, 2013 at 12:05 pm
                           Thanks. I've written five posts on the meaning
                           (and consequences for journalists) of what
                           Edward Snowden did. I think you'll find, if
                           you've read them, that I'm taking it pretty
                           seriously- and personally.
                         @ Michiel Jonker says:
                           [201]August 9, 2013 at 6:47 pm
                           I don´t doubt your good will or your
                           seriousness at all, but I want to point out
                           (following Proximity1's lead) that in this
                           case, an essentially academic stance, however
                           serious, is at odds with the sort of engagement
                           required to make a difference, in the end.
                           I can't look inside you, and I don't know the
                           circumstances in which you are making your
                           personal choices. Maybe your academic stance is
                           tactics in order to make your personal
                           contribution more effective.
                           But if that is so, these tactics are
                           counterproductive in this case. If you think
                           favourably about Snowden's actions, while
                           knowing nothing else about him, why would you
                           not admit that, on the basis of the knowledge
                           that is at your disposal, Snowden seems to be a
                           good person?
                           By not admitting that, you suggest that there
                           is some other, unmentioned factor influencing
                           your judgement of Snowden as a person. Is it
                           fear to be ridiculed by academic-minded friends
                           or to be accused by authorities of being a
                           "Snowden-fan"? By implicitly showing such fear,
                           instead of explicitly admitting and addressing
                           it, you would weaken the strength of your
                           arguments about the positive value of Snowden's
                           actions.
                           By not committing yourself as a person totally
                           to the CONSEQUENCES of your own argument about
                           Snowden's actions, you create the impression
                           that your arguments are somehow incomplete,
                           that there is some shadowside to them that you
                           don't mention. In that way, you do an injustice
                           to your own arguments.
                         @ [202]Jay Rosen says:
                           [203]August 9, 2013 at 11:45 pm
                           If there's something I am not spelling out,
                           it's that I believe in a more complete
                           separation of private and public than most
                           people do, including many of my readers.
                           In this case, the distinction between the
                           private man and the public deeds I rendered as
                           I am not "for" or "against" Snowden. Although I
                           understand why people focus on Snowden the
                           person and the drama of his fate as fugitive, I
                           believe he wants us to focus, and I agree we
                           ought to put our focus, on what he has
                           revealed. That's why I wrote a post called "the
                           Snowden effect."
                           I recognize that the separation between private
                           man and public deeds is not absolute, and that
                           the two are entwined in some degree, but the
                           distinction is one I try to observe in all of
                           my work.
                         @ proximity1 says:
                           [204]August 10, 2013 at 8:35 am
                           You're welcome. I want to reiterate that your
                           essay here is one of the best on the topic that
                           I've read anywhere, by anyone; I'm grateful to
                           G. Greenwald for drawing attention to it.
                           What you point out is _very important_ and few
                           others have looked in so helpful a manner at
                           the underlying facts which you treat. It's for
                           those reasons that I took up trying to take
                           your own insights and apply them further, to
                           your own approach in other respects.
                           There is a question we might ask and seek and
                           answer for: If your assessment is correct here,
                           "Repeal the concept of an informed public,
                           repress your decision to take such a drastic
                           step. But it's not just Jeffrey Toobin.
                           Congress did it too."
                           as I agree it is, then we can wonder,
                           "How and why do so many people of rather better
                           than average intelligence take that course in
                           their thinking?"
                           If so many bright people are doing this, it
                           probably indicates that there's an inner need
                           at work to which they're responding; but what
                           exactly and why?
                           My response is that the inner need(s) concern
                           their attempt to maintain their cognitive
                           balance faced with a set of circumstances which
                           otherwise put them in a flagrant moral dilemma,
                           one which contradicts their own admirable self
                           image. To protect that-which is of extreme
                           psychic importance-they need some way to
                           rationalize the fact set which is so
                           disturbing. We have seen, in the example of
                           Edward Snowden, what can happen when someone of
                           conscience cannot devise a face-saving
                           rationale: he found it impossible to remain in
                           his position; William Binney and Thomas Andrews
                           Drake, facing similar dilemmas, also couldn't
                           trick themselves through a rationale and both
                           turned « whistle-blower », the only morally
                           defensible course open once one traverses the
                           reasoning grounds they covered. A lot of very
                           intelligent people are taking great pains to
                           avoid having to follow those examples. This is
                           evidence of something important -morally and
                           socially important--at work. And we, as
                           observers, are in some way also confronted.
                           That, I think, is the aspect so many find
                           outrageous-though unacknowledged- in Edward
                           Snowden's disclosure: his moral example has put
                           all of us before a very urgent moral issue and
                           escaping it has become both urgent and
                           difficult. Yet many are trying to find an
                           escape. And I think that is behind what we
                           witness in the comments above by Jeffrey
                           Toobin, for example.
                           I want to thank you and your probing article
                           for the fact that it has prompted me to sharpen
                           and refine my thinking on these issues. Before
                           I read your piece, I hadn't seen things in
                           quite the way I do now.
                           o I also have to thank D DAVIES @ August 9,
                           2013 at 2:54 am and MICHIEL JONKER for their
                           follow-up comments which I read and very much
                           appreciated and for the reading recommendation
                           referring to Peter Sloterdijk, "Critique of
                           Cynical Reason" (Kritik der Zynischen Vernunft.
                           And, in reading your article, « The Snowden
                           Effect », your reference and link to Matthew
                           Cooper's essay, « Why Edward Snowden's Motives
                           Matter », which I thought was also
                           exceptionally good analysis throughout.
                         @ Michiel Jonker says:
                           [205]August 11, 2013 at 6:41 am
                           @Jay Rosen and @Proximity1
                           Thanks to both of you for this exchange of
                           thoughts. It offers me consolation, and I will
                           explain why. But first I'd like to react to
                           Jay's latest comment.
                           You write: "If there's something I am not
                           spelling out, it's that I believe in a more
                           complete separation of private and public than
                           most people do, including many of my readers."
                           This is an extremely important point, in at
                           least two ways. Summarizing them: (1) The
                           banality of evil (Hannah Ahrendt) is made
                           possibile by a radical separation of the
                           private and public domain. "Privately, I love
                           my family and my dog. Publicly, I only followed
                           the orders of my superiors when I did horrible
                           things. So as a person, I'm not responsible for
                           what happened." (2) Invasion of a person's
                           privacy is not the same as evaluation or
                           judgement of a person's character on the basis
                           of his or her public acts.
                           You write: "Although I understand why people
                           focus on Snowden the person and the drama of
                           his fate as fugitive, I believe he wants us to
                           focus, and I agree we ought to put our focus,
                           on what he has revealed."
                           I agree with you here, but as it happens,
                           Snowden has also, and most importantly,
                           revealed something to a large public about the
                           psychological mechanisms (in big organisations)
                           that make terrifying abuses possible, and about
                           the psychological mechanisms (as exemplified in
                           his own person) that are required to counter
                           such abuses and to limit the damage that they
                           are causing. Snowden makes, as a person, a very
                           strong moral appeal to us all - to us as
                           persons.
                           You write: "I recognize that the separation
                           between private man and public deeds is not
                           absolute, and that the two are entwined in some
                           degree, but the distinction is one I try to
                           observe in all of my work."
                           I am afraid that, in this case, you will have
                           to sacrifice part of the paradigm on the basis
                           of which you have thus far been doing your
                           work, in order to enable yourself to take your
                           work a step further. It is required by the
                           nature of this specific case in combination
                           with the nature of the private-public
                           entwinement. It would be, in a deep sense,
                           immoral to exclude personal considerations from
                           your evaluation of the merits of Snowden's
                           actions, and those of the journalists (like
                           Greenwald) and newspapers (like The Guardian)
                           that are vital to the effectiveness of
                           Snowden's actions.
                           The reason that I feel consoled by our exchange
                           of thoughts, is that it makes me feel less
                           alone. Some years ago, I became a
                           whistle-blower. The abuse in question was of
                           very small proportions compared to what many
                           other whistleblowers have revealed, especially
                           since then. I even managed to stay employed by
                           my employer for the time being, in spite of
                           publicity. However, all the psychological
                           mechanisms (both individual and collective)
                           that one sees occurring in the Snowden case,
                           also occurred in my case, as in the cases of
                           almost all whistleblowers who are not silenced
                           prematurely.
                           The many ways in which people distance
                           themselves psychologically from whistleblowers,
                           are one of the reasons why most whistleblowers
                           succumb to the psychological burden that
                           follows their choice to divulge something. For
                           people who have managed to stay "inside the
                           fold", it is almost impossible to image what it
                           does with a person when one is "out in the
                           cold" for a long time - having to defend
                           oneself without receiving substantial support
                           from well-meaning people. It would be
                           interesting to get statistics about the
                           percentage of whistleblowers who get heart
                           attacks, compared to non-whistleblowers.
                           What triggered me to respond to this article
                           about the "Toobin principle", is that you, Jay,
                           address some of these mechanisms, while at the
                           same time implicitly obeying another member of
                           the same family. That IS very interesting.
                           Please don't think that I'm laughing AT you.
                           The process that I've been going through, has
                           made it necessary for me to look at my own
                           mechanisms as well, in fundamental ways. And
                           believe me, it is a zoo. I am quite sure that
                           Snowden is working hard these days, not only on
                           "the big game", but also doing a lot of
                           self-reflection. It is the only way to survive
                           the process as a HUMAN being.
                           It would be so healthy if people like Clapper,
                           Alexander and Obama would turn part of their
                           attention away from power-play in order to
                           balance it with real self-reflection. But I'm
                           afraid they are quite addicted to power-play
                           and their position somewhere high up in their
                           herd, which they try to make also our herd -
                           ignoring their chances to participate in a real
                           community. And despite well-groomed public
                           appearances, their addiction to power cannot
                           but have a deep influence on their private life
                           as well.
                         @ joe says:
                           [206]August 13, 2013 at 8:14 am
                           @Jonker: You're talking about a much more
                           radical separation than what Jay is talking
                           about here.
                           Not intentionally bringing in your point of
                           view -- or even trying to disavow it -- is
                           perfectly reasonable as a particular kind of
                           argument. Claiming that C is true regardless of
                           whether A or B (even knowing that I think A) is
                           a very strong argument for C.
                           That's very different from saying that "I'm
                           personally for A, but in public I do B for
                           pragmatic reasons", which is a common political
                           position that introduces issues of "banality of
                           evil". It's particular common among liberals
                           who want to claim credit of "good intentions"
                           even when they're real intentions as analyzed
                           by their effective speech and actions are in
                           direct opposition to those claimed intentions.
                         @ Michiel Jonker says:
                           [207]August 13, 2013 at 6:29 pm
                           @Joe (13 August, 8:14 AM)
                           Thanks for probing my position. Here follows my
                           commment on your probe.
                           You write: "@Jonker: You're talking about a
                           much more radical separation than what Jay is
                           talking about here."
                           Well, Jay Rosen does not specify how radical
                           the separation is that he, in his work, wants
                           to make between the "private" and the "public"
                           domain. So what you are doing here, is to try
                           to fill in the void that Jay leaves. What I
                           did, was to imply that an argument which leaves
                           such a void, is not convincing, because it
                           opens the door for moral acceptance of "banal
                           forms of evil". (Like a chain, an argument is
                           as strong as its weakest link.)
                           You continue, trying to fill the void: "Not
                           intentionally bringing in your [i.e. Jay´s]
                           point of view -- or even trying to disavow it
                           -- is perfectly reasonable as a particular kind
                           of argument. Claiming that C is true regardless
                           of whether A or B (even knowing that I think A)
                           is a very strong argument for C."
                           Sorry, but that is not what Jay did. Jay
                           asserted that he, Jay, is not "for" or
                           "against" Snowden (Snowden as a person who made
                           a moral choice to divulge information, and a
                           pragmatic AND moral choice to survive AND
                           maintain his ability to talk in the future by
                           keeping himself out of the reach of the US
                           government - including the US "justice
                           apparatus", which has been severely compromised
                           in several ways).
                           Jay gave a strong hint that he in fact was
                           thinking A (i.e. sympathizing with Snowden),
                           but he did not want to be taken up on that
                           hint. That is a form of hypocrisy.
                           Jay´s position would have been convincing, or
                           at least consistent, if he had said that he is
                           both "for" Snowden and "for" Obama, Clapper,
                           Alexander etc. - hoping that all of them will
                           make good moral choices in the future. But that
                           is not what Jay said.
                           You continue: "That's very different from
                           saying that "I'm personally for A, but in
                           public I do B for pragmatic reasons", which is
                           a common political position that introduces
                           issues of "banality of evil"."
                           Alas for your argument, this is exactly what
                           Jay implied/hinted: that he is personally
                           sympathizing with Snowden, but that he does not
                           sympathize in public, for pragmatic reasons
                           (his reason being that he wants to focus
                           attention on the content of Snowden´s
                           revelations, not on Snowden´s person or
                           "saga").
                           Jay wants to have his cake and eat it. He wants
                           to be perceived as being a strong defender of a
                           well-informed public, but he also wants to be
                           perceived as being free of any moral
                           association with the man Edward Snowden. In
                           order to achieve this, Jay formally denies
                           having a positive opinion about the morals of
                           the man who made a well-informed public
                           possible, while at the same time hinting that
                           he (Jay) has such a positive opinion.
                           You conclude: "It's particular[ly] common among
                           liberals who want to claim credit of "good
                           intentions" even when [their] real intentions
                           as analyzed by their effective speech and
                           actions are in direct opposition to those
                           claimed intentions."
                           Jay does two things: (1) He wants to claim
                           credit of good intentions, and merits this
                           credit by taking a stand in favour of a
                           well-informed public; (2) He wants to claim
                           credit of good intentions, but says something
                           in opposition to such intentions, by denying
                           his moral association with Snowden.
                           This shows that Jay´s loyalty is divided. He
                           wants to do the right thing, but does not want
                           to risk losing part of his position in terms of
                           his relations with his academic, journalistic
                           and political network.
                           My experience as a whistleblower (see above)
                           has taught me that one cannot count on the
                           support of people with a divided loyalty, when
                           things get really unsavoury. This does not
                           diminish my respect for Jay´s valuable
                           contribution in the present phase of the
                           process.
                           But it influences my expectations about his
                           behaviour if things would get really difficult.
                           For instance, taking a hypothetical thought
                           example, if Congress, judges and key
                           functionaries of newspapers would get
                           seriously, secretly and massively intimidated
                           by the US government, I am not sure where Jay
                           would stand then. Maybe he would opt for safety
                           and leave certain other people to their fate.
                           In fact, I am not sure of my own behaviour in
                           such a case, either.
                         @ Michiel Jonker says:
                           [208]August 13, 2013 at 8:02 pm
                           P.S. Confession, for the sake of intellectual
                           honesty: suddenly I remember that I´ve said
                           somewhere else, about a month ago: "It is not
                           about Snowden as a person. It is not about
                           legal hair-splitting (Snowden breaking some
                           secrecy laws that seem straightaway inspired by
                           mafia practices). It is not about spying on
                           diplomats. It is about spying on millions of
                           innocent citizens."
                           So a month ago I said that it is not about
                           Snowden as a person, and now I criticize Jay
                           Rosen for saying he is not "for" or "against"
                           Snowden as a person. Why?
                           The reason is that, about a month ago, I was
                           afraid that the US and European governments
                           would succeed in their attempts to divert
                           attention from the content of Snowden´s
                           revelations, in order to be able to label him
                           as a criminal. Now that it is clear that these
                           attempts have more or less failed (for the time
                           being, in the USA and Germany), and Snowden is
                           widely recognized as an honest whistleblower
                           who revealed true and very relevant facts, it
                           has become less risky to emphasize the
                           importance of the moral example he gives us as
                           a person.
                           So there was "political" rhetoric in my
                           statement of a month ago. At the time, I was
                           not conscious of that. Interesting.
                           It would be even more interesting to hear
                           whether Jay Rosen's statement about not being
                           "for" or "against" Snowden as a person, has
                           comparable roots.
                         @ [209]Jay Rosen says:
                           [210]August 13, 2013 at 9:29 pm
                           Re: roots. One of them is this statement by
                           Snowden:
                           "I don't want public attention because I don't
                           want the story to be about me. I want it to be
                           about what the US government is doing."
                           He does not fear the consequences of going
                           public, he said, only that doing so will
                           distract attention from the issues raised by
                           his disclosures. "I know the media likes to
                           personalise political debates, and I know the
                           government will demonise me."
                           [211]http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/
                           09/edward-snowden-nsa-whistleblower-surveillanc
                           e
                         @ joe says:
                           [212]August 16, 2013 at 4:24 am
                           @Jonker: You continue: "That's very different
                           from saying that "I'm personally for A, but in
                           public I do B for pragmatic reasons", which is
                           a common political position that introduces
                           issues of "banality of evil"."
                           Alas for your argument, this is exactly what
                           Jay implied/hinted: that he is personally
                           sympathizing with Snowden, but that he does not
                           sympathize in public, for pragmatic reasons
                           (his reason being that he wants to focus
                           attention on the content of Snowden´s
                           revelations, not on Snowden´s person or
                           "saga").
                           ============
                           This is where you crucially missed my argument
                           (and I failed to properly explain it). I'm
                           arguing against the "banality of evil" being
                           mere hypocrisy. Hypocrisy is one of the least
                           sins, that has been blown up to vast extents to
                           avoid making real moral choices.
                           The "pragmatic" public choice I'm talking about
                           isn't public virtue that you can't live up to.
                           It's a pragmatic immoral act that contravenes
                           your private morals. It's the inverse of
                           hypocrisy, where you fulfill your evil public
                           duty yet save your personal virtue because
                           you're kind to neighbors, dogs and small
                           children.
                           That's not what Jay is doing. He is playing a
                           rhetorical game -- but claiming that he isn't
                           "for" or "against" Snowden is merely a
                           rhetorical ploy. It's not an evil act against
                           his innermost heart that he does as a pragmatic
                           requirement of the day. It's just setting the
                           stage for a conversation.
                           Save the moral condemnation for real sins. It
                           devalues the entire concept when it becomes one
                           more tool in the internet argument arsenal.
                           There really are bad guys out there who
                           exemplify the "banality of evil".
                         @ Michiel Jonker says:
                           [213]August 16, 2013 at 5:42 pm
                           @Jay Rosen (13 August, 9:29 AM)
                           Thanks for explaining about the "root" that
                           persuaded you to say that you are not "for" or
                           "against" Snowden. You wanted to follow
                           Snowden's wishes, and to follow his strategy of
                           focusing on the content of his revelations. Two
                           questions:
                           1. Do you agree that it can, in some
                           situations, help Snowden if you, as a
                           journalist and as a professor of journalism,
                           adopt a different position from that of Snowden
                           himself? For instance by stating that the story
                           of Snowden's personal moral choices form a
                           vital part of the Snowden effect?
                           2. Do you agree that the risk that Snowden's
                           personal story is succesfully abused for
                           diverting attention from the content of his
                           revelations, has been over for the last couple
                           of weeks?
                           If you agree with both points, could that be a
                           reason to revise your position and now admit
                           that you are in fact "for" Snowden, in the
                           sense that you explicitly applaud his moral act
                           of divulging information to the public,
                           including his breaking certain secrecy laws
                           that would otherwise have prevented him from
                           divulging this information? Because it was the
                           only way in which Snowden could enable the
                           public to become "well-informed" informed
                           again, after having been totally deceived by
                           governments and major internet companies?
                         @ Michiel Jonker says:
                           [214]August 16, 2013 at 6:14 pm
                           @Joe (August 16 at 4:24 AM)
                           I think you are making things needlessly
                           complex, and that this contribution of yours is
                           not entirely coherent. Now you seem to
                           introduce a distinction between three kinds of
                           behaviour: (1) "banal evil" (doing evil deeds
                           while invoking orders /laws /wishes from above
                           in an attempt to be absolved from personal
                           responsibility); (2) "mere hypocrisy"; (3)
                           "rethorical ploys". You claim that Jay Rosen is
                           behaving in the third way, with which there is
                           nothing wrong - according to you.
                           Well, let's be a bit rough. Following your
                           reasoning, it could be said of Mr. Goebbels
                           (minister of propaganda of the Nazi regime)
                           that he was just playing a rhetorical game. In
                           your words: "It's just setting the stage for a
                           conversation."
                           And, still following that reasoning, the same
                           could then also be said of many generals, for
                           instance the American generals who directed the
                           Vietnam war - they did not shoot themselves,
                           did they? They only, well, persuaded others to
                           do that, referring to certain laws and
                           duties... Sorry, but in my opinion that kind of
                           reasoning is very unsound.
                           Rhetoric by intelligent, knowledgeable people
                           concerning important public matters is never
                           innocent. What Jay does - denying that he is
                           "for" or "against" Snowden as a person, i.e. as
                           a person who made moral choices and acted
                           according to them - is a subtle way of
                           forsaking Snowden and the morals for which
                           Snowden put everything at risk.
                           Who was that biblical figure again who denied
                           three times that he had seen... One does not
                           need to be a Christian to recognize the moral
                           content of this biblical story.
                         @ JOE says:
                           [215]August 17, 2013 at 8:59 am
                           @Joinkers:
                           Goebbels, really? Curtis LeMay, really?
                           I know the internet loves legalism, but I don't
                           think your analogies have any substance. That
                           Rosen is trying to shift the argument away from
                           Snowden and focus on the important matters has
                           no moral overlap with a propaganda campaign
                           that resulted in the death of millions.
                           Step away from the argument. Step away from the
                           words -- there's no banality of evil here, or
                           hypocrisy. There's a dude who at worst covered
                           up his private inclination to focus his
                           argument.
                           If that's a Judas or Peter, we've sunk back
                           into the legalism that ultimately is what the
                           guys you referenced LOVE.
                         @ Michiel Jonker says:
                           [216]August 17, 2013 at 12:11 pm
                           @Joe (August 17, 2013 at 8:59 AM)
                           Joe, could you please spell my name correctly?
                           I'd really appreciate that. That's not
                           legalism, but just plain civility. By the way,
                           what is your full name? Afraid to mention it?
                           You completely miss the point. When I referred
                           to interpreting the behaviour of Goebbels or
                           certain generals as innocent, I did not make
                           any comparison with Jay's behaviour. I referred
                           to your way of reasoning, which can be used to
                           arrive at such absurd conclusions. My point was
                           that this shows that your way of reasoning is
                           very unsound, because with such reasoning you
                           can argue that ANYBODY, even the greatest
                           villain, is not responsible for his deeds.
                           Such unsound reasoning should not be applied to
                           the behaviour of Jay Rosen. He deserves better.
                           You write that Rosen's behaviour "has no moral
                           overlap with a propaganda campaign that
                           resulted in the death of millions." I don't
                           know what you mean with "no moral overlap", to
                           me it sounds like a term that can serve to
                           create certain taboos. I don't like that kind
                           of taboos (political correctness). But I
                           definitely think there is no need whatever to
                           compare Jay Rosen's behaviour to that of people
                           responsible for many killings. Strange that you
                           thought I would make such a comparison.
                           Then you write: "Step away from the argument."
                           That is what I would advise you to do - with
                           reference to your argument (reasoning) which I
                           criticized. But in order to do that, you first
                           have to recognize and identify what kind of
                           argument you actually made.
                           You write: "There's a dude who at worst covered
                           up his private inclination to focus his
                           argument." No, I think that is disingenious of
                           you to say. Jay Rosen is perfectly able to
                           focus his argument without disclaiming his
                           opinion ("for" or "against") regarding
                           Snowden's moral choices and actions.
                           You conclude: "If that's a Judas or Peter,
                           we've sunk back into the legalism that
                           ultimately is what the guys you referenced
                           LOVE." Huh? Why would it be legalism to
                           criticize somebody for looking away, or for
                           subtly forsaking somebody who made a brave
                           choice? Please explain.
                         @ joe says:
                           [217]August 27, 2013 at 2:35 pm
                           @Jonker: I referred to your way of reasoning,
                           which can be used to arrive at such absurd
                           conclusions.
                           That's a fallacious argument. Any
                           non-mathematical argument, taken out of
                           context, leads to absurd conclusion. This is
                           pretty much the entire history of philosophy:
                           take a perfectly good argument, apply it out of
                           context, and then show how it leads to absurd
                           results to try to prove that the common
                           understanding in the first place was wrong.
                           That has led to hugely wasted time and effort.
                           And now, completely off-topic, which is that at
                           best you accuse Jay of a minor misdemeanor.
                           Everyone has divided loyalty. There is no
                           purity in this world -- and if you believe you
                           have it, that's pretty good evidence that
                           you're fooling yourself.
                           I understand that you want deep reflection
                           about these things -- but deep reflection has
                           to start with the ways we fool ourselves, not
                           rhetorical devices that may or may not be to
                           our taste.
   32. Rob says:
       [218]August 8, 2013 at 3:08 pm
       Good analysis and commentary. I think you and Will Wilkinson are
       right in identifying the core of the problem being the idea that
       "national security" (and its related issues) is too "important" to
       be left for the public to decide. Ultimately, it's about democracy.
       Said differently, in a certain sense, people like Toobin don't
       really believe in democracy and think that these issues can and
       should be worked out by a specialized class of individuals
       operating more or less in the dark, who supposedly have our best
       interests at heart. Hence the need for swift and ostentatious
       repression - to send a message - when leaks disrupt that well-oiled
       system, as we saw in the Bradley Manning case.
       The contradiction between on the one hand welcoming the debate
       occasioned by people like Snowden and Manning, profiting from it,
       and on the other finding the actions which brought about the debate
       reprehensible is the classic contradiction which appears in people
       who have the luxury of debating these issues but who would risk
       nothing themselves to raise them.

     They can take advantage of federal whistle-blower laws; they can
     bring their complaints to Congress; they can try to protest within
     the institutions where they work. But Snowden did none of this.
       - This is often said about Manning by his detractors and, as is the
       case with Snowden, is contradicted by their own statements, which
       show that they were discouraged from pursuing certain avenues. The
       reason they leaked these materials is precisely because they knew
       that to be the only way to concretely affect policy, all other
       avenues being closed to them.
   33. [219]Michael Murry says:
       [220]August 8, 2013 at 3:28 pm
       At a more fundamental level, the term "classified" has clearly
       become strictly meaningless. The US government's pathological need
       to operate in secret leads it to "classify" just about everything,
       even going so far as to re-classify publicly available information
       from the past. And when any government starts believing in the
       mutability of the past as a means of controlling the future, then
       we have truly entered an Orwellian world.
          + joe says:
            [221]August 9, 2013 at 9:32 am
            Look at the Reuter's DEA story on "parallel construction",
            where NSA tips are vacuumed from history.
   34. RuizM says:
       [222]August 9, 2013 at 11:33 am
       `
       [ "The Toobin Principle:
       repeal the concept of an informed public, repress your decision to
       take such a drastic step because it's too much to face " ]
       ===
       Toobin's problem distills down to plain old cognitive dissonance --
       very common in journalism, politics, religion, and life.
       Toobin is personally insignificant except to highlight how
       rational, well educated, well-intentioned people so easily embrace
       illogical and destructive viewponts. It helps explain how are
       government guided America into its present dystopia.
       ===
       "Most people would rather die than think - in
       fact, they do " -George Santayana
   35. [223]Lawrence Serewicz says:
       [224]August 9, 2013 at 1:47 pm
       An interesting article that allows rhetoric to replace analysis.
       Take Mr. Risen's question "What part would you not want to see?"
       How can that be answered? It cannot. Why? Because the answer
       reveals the context and the wider security. Taken in isolation any
       single piece of information looks harmless.
       Secondly, people were discussing secrecy and surveillance before
       Snowden. The media has made it a big issue so it must be new. Alas,
       research would show that it has been a key concern for a lot of
       people inside and outside the government for a long time. Top media
       story does not make it new, but then that is how journalism works
       these days.
       In terms of the practical issue, an opponent looks to do is build
       up a mosaic of understanding of a country's capabilities so it can
       defeat those capabilities. To find out about those capabilities, a
       country will look at a variety of sources mainly open and then
       closed to build up a picture. There is a lot of noise,
       distractions, from which the signal needs to be found. An opponent
       may wait years for various signals to identify the targeted
       information. The more it is hidden, the harder it is to extract the
       parts to reverse engineer it. Leaving that aside, there is a deeper
       flaw within this whole approach.
       Most readers need to start with Pozen's work on secrecy.
       [225]https://www.law.upenn.edu/institutes/cerl/conferences/ethicsof
       secrecy/papers/reading/Pozen.pdf and follow Steven Aftergood's
       excellent blog [226]http://blogs.fas.org/secrecy/
       Reading Pozen's article and Mr. Aftergood's blog would help us to
       avoid having uninformed journalists trying to explain secrecy
       issues to the uninformed public. This is not a criticism, it is to
       point out that most commentary is going from a pre-set rhetorical
       or political position rather than a sustained or examined body of
       knowledge. Moreover, the public is trying to digest this half or
       pre-digested punditry without a baseline or a frame of reference.
       We get the miller lite of analysis (Privacy Good (Taste great)
       Security Good (less filling) rather than informed debate. Dueling
       soundbites is not informed debate.
       The flaw that I mentioned is twofold. First, we elect
       representatives to work for us and to maintain scrutiny of the
       government. The public while interested are trying to get on with
       their lives and do not have the time nor the interest to be their
       own representatives 24/7. To put it differently, but directly,
       America is *not* a direct democracy. We forget the democratic
       process in our indignation that the NSA is doing its job.
       Second, we forget that America is engaged in serious conflicts
       around the world with people who very much want to kill and maim
       Americans (and its allies) as and when they can. As a result, the
       United States (and all countries) operates a surveillance system.
       (Quick name a country that does not have a surveillance system of
       some sort.) To prevent this surveillance is needed. As the threats
       have changed, all the 9/11 attackers were inside the United States
       before the attack, and are not state sponsored, it is very
       difficult to identify them. (They usually avoid publishing their
       intent and membership lists on the web). This is why it is rather
       disingenuous to focus on the Patriot Act, when the Public Law
       107-40 presents a more compelling case for why the NSA is doing
       what it does.
       The final point to note is that this blog entry is an analysis of
       the media response to a media issue. At best, it is a meta analysis
       of the security issues and a proxy for the public's opinion on the
       role of the NSA. What the media and the journalists believe and do
       is not the same as what the public believe and do nor is it what
       the elect their representatives to do.
       Other than those minor points, this is a well written piece that
       stimulates thinking and presents an insightful analysis of the
       media's response to the issue.
          + joe says:
            [227]August 13, 2013 at 8:27 am
            America is a representative democracy and not a direct
            democracy. Pseudo-intellectual balderdash -- throw in some
            Madison to win the jackpot.
            Representative democracy has never worked on the principle
            that we pick personalities which then have free reign. Almost
            every society would be democratic under such a definition, and
            that in fact goes way beyond Bolzhevik democratic centralism
            in putting form over substance.
            Even going back to Madison, representative democracy means
            that we elect policy makers on the basis of their history of
            making policy, and continue to reelect them on their
            transparent history of policy decisions.
            They are our agent. An agent continue in good graces on the
            basis of how well they advance our interests when we audit
            them, not by picking them by "character" or some such
            theological nonsense. They represent us in the sense that they
            are doing what we believe we would do, if we had the time and
            education to do so, not in the sense that they are some
            organic sampling of us.
            The only way to know whether they are in fact representing our
            interests is to audit their decisions. If we are incapable of
            that, and are asked to trust their private judgment, then we
            are not being represented by them at all -- we are merely
            consenting to be ruled by them.
            And that's no more democratic than the election of kings
            during the dark ages.
          + joe says:
            [228]August 13, 2013 at 8:33 am
            "Other than those minor points, this is a well written piece
            that stimulates thinking and presents an insightful analysis
            of the media's response to the issue."
            And that's just trollish. You present such points as "You
            forget that we're at war", "You have no idea about our theory
            of government", and "This is merely navel gazing"; then you
            add nonsense politeness, which is simply an insult to the
            reader, as if you could go around our rationality with this
            flimsy "civility".
            Civility without substance, a classic move of the
            propagandist. You know, the folks reading here can tie their
            shoes without your help.
   36. proximity1 says:
       [229]August 11, 2013 at 8:36 am
       @ Michiel Jonker: August 11, 2013 at 6:41 am
       Rationalisations are one of the most frequent and the most
       formidable tactics in coping with the dissonance that we face, the
       unsettling inconguencies between what our objective observations
       relate to us and what we'd prefer to see and believe to be the
       truth, the facts.
       Anyone who accepts the moral challenge to challenge a belief or a
       set of practices which are false but commonly-accepted and, most of
       all, approved by authorities is going to provoke hostility from
       _most_ others who by definition are `the crowd' that goes along to
       get along.
       Michiel, you may have at some point taken solace in reflecting on
       the fact that those still faithless, the protectors of the false
       system, are the people who have failed morally and their
       castigations of you are the evidence of their deep insecurity.
       Their denunciations can be understood as the "homage" a fraud and
       pays to those whose morals are superior to their own. This is also
       something that there is clear evidence of Edward Snowden's having
       understood. In his public remarks, he's clearly not impressed with
       the attempts by President Obama to position himself on the moral
       high ground, which any honest person can see he has no place on.
       Another remark on the "personal vs. public" aspects of the Snowden
       affair:
       some issues are mainly personal in character, other mainly public.
       Still others are par excellence ones which have both an essential
       personal aspect and a public aspect. Issues which concern political
       morals are perhaps the most ideal example of the type which are
       necessarily at once personal and public. To look for a way to
       separate or lessen the significance of one or the other is to
       distort the character of the matter at hand and to invite a view
       which "crops the image" to the detriment of the observer.
       In this, a "personal vs. public" approach presents a false
       dichotomny, I think. In order to gain the valuable moral lessons
       that this affair presents for us, we have to reject that tempting
       view and recognize that in this and other vital issues, there is no
       valid "personal vs. public" distinction to be made. These are
       matters which, because they are political, are essentially public,
       and, because they are moral in character, are no less essentially
       personal.
       Finally, that leads me to this observation which I'd very much like
       to see discussed in greater depth somewhere:
       There is something particularly pathetic in the assuptions and the
       collective behaviors of the president and his supporters in their
       effort to defend themselves morally and intellectually. I have in
       mind that their entire posture is one which implicitly denies and
       ignores what is essential about our technological & moral
       predicament.
       Here is my rough-draft brief of the matters we have still to
       address very seriously :

     U.S. society, like practically all the other similar modern
     high-technology nation states (Britain, France, Germany, Italy-
     "Western Europe & Japan" in general- are rotting morally from within
     while what are more and more evidently desperate efforts to shore up
     a society via technological "fixes" are officialdom's norm in
     response.
     That, we ought to recognize, is pathetic and it's emblematic of what
     is going so terribly wrong in our societies.
     Internal moral rot cannot be remedied by greater and greater efforts
     to supervise and control-however imopressive the technology being
     used may be.
     "This moral rot, which is put down to diverse causes according to
     conflicting political ideologies (Allan Bloom made a reactionary
     conservative's case in his book, The Closing of the American Mind,
     while others, to whose views I subscribe, countered with a very
     different analysis, while still agreeing in substance that there are
     very deep and serious defaults in our society's course-see, e.g.
     Neil Postman's Technopoly: The Surrender of Culture to Technology as
     one of the best examples of the views I support), is only worsened
     by the measures being taken to, it is claimed, make and keep us
     safer from danger. But whatever the political ideological point of
     view, the facts before us are rightly alarming and they cannot be
     seriously addressed by resorting to still-more-strictly-imposed
     authority, backed by every more invasive and imposing technology,
     however benign the sales pitches and the public realtions campaigns
     to lure the public into acceptance.
          + [230]Jay Rosen says:
            [231]August 11, 2013 at 10:55 am
            From the conclusion to [232]my earlier post, The Snowden
            effect: "The Snowden effect is far more important than the
            Snowden saga, meaning: the story of what happens to him as the
            United States pursues his capture and arrest, plus what comes
            out about his background and motivations. But I would not call
            his personal story a `distraction' from the real story. That's
            not right. Who he is, what kind of access he had, why he did
            what he did, and even the arguments about whether he's a
            disloyal creep or a profile in courage are inescapably part of
            the larger story and the public debate it has triggered. (Read
            Matt Cooper of National Journal [233]on this issue.) You can't
            wish for more public attention to the surveillance state and
            then scoff at one of the means by which people come to the
            larger story, which is his story. But I repeat what I said:
            the Snowden effect is ultimately more important than the
            Snowden saga."
               o Michiel Jonker says:
                 [234]August 11, 2013 at 7:37 pm
                 It seems you make a distinction now between "not being
                 either for Snowden or against Snowden" and "regarding the
                 Snowden effect as more important than the Snowden saga".
                 Proximity1's comment was about the disclaimer at the
                 beginning of your present post that you are not "for" or
                 "against" Snowden. By reverting to your distinction the
                 "Snowden effect" and the "Snowden saga" as made in your
                 earlier post, you dodge the discussion about your
                 disclaimer.
                 Even if you regard the "Snowden saga" as less important,
                 it does not need to mean that you have no opinion about
                 Snowden as a person. So why the disclaimer?
                 Moreover, the "Snowden effect" as you described it,
                 implies a moral awakening by a large public, their
                 representatives, and journalists. This moral awakening
                 can only described meaningfully by taking into account
                 the personal roles fulfilled by Snowden on the one hand,
                 and his adversaries (e.g. Clapper, Alexander, Holder,
                 Obama) on the other hand.
                 The widespread indignance about what governments and
                 their secret services have done, is rather consistently
                 expressed in terms like "the lying bastards" and "Snowden
                 is a hero". It is the personal roles fulfilled by the
                 whistleblower and his antagonists, which people can
                 identify with or abhor.
                 Calling the "Snowden saga" less important than the
                 "Snowden effect" is like calling the heart less important
                 than the total blood circulation system: in theory it is
                 correct, because a heart could be replaced by a
                 transplant; but in practice it is meaningless, because
                 this transplant would also be a heart of sorts. The
                 Snowden saga is a vital part of the Snowden effect.
                 The theoretical possibility that there could have been a
                 John Smith saga and therefore a John Smith effect, is
                 hardly a good reason for calling the Snowden saga "less
                 important" than the Snowden effect.
                 So why bother?
                 I smell fear.
                 I have experienced fear myself. If you are afraid, this
                 does not lessen my respect for you. What would disappoint
                 me, is unwillingness to acknowledge this fear as the true
                 reason for claiming not to be "for" or "against" Snowden,
                 and for looking away from the central importance of the
                 morals, choices and history of specific, named persons
                 for what happens in this world at this moment.
                    # proximity1 says:
                      [235]August 13, 2013 at 5:55 am
                      Your comment here (@ 7:37 p.m.) presents my own
                      sentiments exactly, down to the smallest detail.
                      Thank you-again-for stating things so clearly and so
                      well.
          + Michiel Jonker says:
            [236]August 12, 2013 at 3:45 am
            @Proximity1 (August 11, 8:36 AM)
            I agree with your remark about rationalisations that are used
            by people in an attempt to reduce their own stress, when that
            results from cognitive dissonance (meaning: their perception
            of the difference between the world as it is, and how they
            deeply long for it to be - a perception that causes them to
            feel pain, and then fear).
            How much cognitive dissonance can we stand? We all get some
            training. But we can react to this training in different ways.
            Roughly speaking: either by repressing our perception (of
            which the Toobin principle is an example, as pointed out by
            Jay Rosen, but of which the disclaimer of Jay Rosen himself
            also seems to be an example); or by acknowledging our
            perception (not the perception of our neighbour, but our own)
            and dealing with it, for instance by taking action in the real
            world (like Snowden has done), and/or by mourning consciously
            about things we are unable to change.
            Moral superiority is a very tricky issue. Claiming the "moral
            high ground" for oneself can easily become a way of repressing
            certain perceptions, and of manipulating other people - as we
            have seen Obama trying to do in the first speech about the
            NSA-spying in which he took a stand, just before he went on
            holiday.
            Claiming moral superiority can also create a lot of
            antagonism, if it is done in a way that belittles other
            people, directly or indirectly. The higher the hierarchical
            position of a person in his community, the bigger his space
            for claiming moral superiority without creating antagonism
            inside this community. The Pope is a good example of this. The
            way in which Obama claimed moral superiority in his speech,
            shows that he has a narrow view of the community he belongs
            to. He has lost touch with a lot of people. And he seems to
            underestimate the loss of authority (i.e. informal position)
            that he has incurred in the last two (or six) months.
            Snowden, on the other hand, seems to have been very aware of
            the risks of (the attribution of) moral superiority - as you
            also point out. Already in his first interview he asserted
            that he was just a normal American.
            You write: "Michiel, you may have at some point taken solace
            in reflecting on the fact that those still faithless, the
            protectors of the false system, are the people who have failed
            morally and their castigations of you are the evidence of
            their deep insecurity. Their denunciations can be understood
            as the "homage" a fraud pays to those whose morals are
            superior to their own."
            I did not take solace in a view like that, because I felt that
            such a view would not help to improve the situation in any
            practical way.
            What Snowden seems to do, is not claiming moral superiority,
            but allowing people´s perception of it to do its work, without
            himself getting attached to the way in which people perceive
            him.
            While the leaders who are responsible for the spying
            activities use (manipulative) power in order to win the
            battle, Snowden uses (moral) strength.
            In Snowden, very talented deceivers like Keith Alexander and
            Obama seem to have found a very talented, honest opponent.
            That the best may win!
   37. joe says:
       [237]August 12, 2013 at 6:39 am
       In regards to total surveillance of emails across international
       boundaries, Judith A. Emmel said in the NYT:
       "In carrying out its signals intelligence mission, N.S.A. collects
       only what it is explicitly authorized to collect," she said.
       "Moreover, the agency's activities are deployed only in response to
       requirements for information to protect the country and its
       interests."
       That's an interesting quote to parse, in terms of this repression.
       Since we can't have a publication discussion of what the
       "explicitly authorized to collect is", since that is interpreted by
       secret DOJ finding, and since we can't discuss what it "our country
       and its interests", since those are also defined by secret DOJ
       findings and secret cases, in fact those terms mean precisely what
       a very small collection of people define them to mean, with no
       possible feedback from the rest of the human race, other than
       whether we like the cut of their gib.
       Once transparency is gone, words themselves lose any possibility of
       being tied to meaning. Once meaning is gone, what do we have left?
          + proximity1 says:
            [238]August 13, 2013 at 6:21 am
            Illusions.
               o joe says:
                 [239]August 13, 2013 at 8:17 am
                 Which implies personal and social insanity. Derangement
                 to be a bit more technical.
   38. [240]Lawrence Serewicz says:
       [241]August 12, 2013 at 11:28 am
       I just wish the public would have read what the government already
       published for years on the surveillance state.
       Perhaps that is the news story we need to consider, why is it the
       public only take notice when the press publicize the issue?
       Here is the public report from the Congressional Research Service
       from 2006 on the NSA programme.
       [242]http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/intel/m010506.pdf
       Or this law school article on the constitutionality of the
       warrantless programme. [243]http://bit.ly/1eEuyf7
       Or this report that explains the amendment, that gives immunity to
       telecommunications providers for providing the data.
       Wow, we need Snowden to tell us what was already published in 2006
       and a concern from 2001 onward. Or failing that, they could have
       subscribed to Secrecy news and seen this discussion since 2006.
       [244]http://blogs.fas.org/secrecy/?s=fisa&submit_x=-957&submit_y=-8
       1&post_type=post&paged=10
       Is this really news or is someone's political agenda at work?
       Perhaps that is story we need to consider. Why now? Who benefits
       from this "disclosure".
          + [245]Jay Rosen says:
            [246]August 12, 2013 at 12:08 pm
            Yes, why doesn't the general public read more law review
            articles? It's a big fat mystery.
               o [247]Lawrence Serewicz says:
                 [248]August 12, 2013 at 2:15 pm
                 I would not expect the public to read law articles. I
                 would expect them to look beyond the headlines and hype
                 presented as "new and breaking" and use their own
                 critical reason and the internet to consider whether the
                 hype is justified. I found the reports by using the
                 search terms NSA, warrantless, surveillance and found the
                 relevant information. However, I am less concerned about
                 the public than I am about journalists who are paid to
                 research and write on these topics.
                 Wikipedia has dozens of these pages and loads of
                 information. Again, where is the discussion of the
                 retroactive immunity offered by the President. The
                 coverage in 2006 was minor. Is it that it now fits an
                 agenda today?
                 I can understand the public not being as interested (so
                 much for the Snowden effect) however, I cannot understand
                 why people, journalists in particular, who are paid to
                 write have not done this research and seem surprised to
                 find out about the reports, the history of the FISA and
                 FICA.
                 After all, Madison did argue that "A popular government
                 without popular information
                 or the means of acquiring it is but a prologue to a farce
                 or a tragedy, or perhaps both. Knowledge will forever
                 govern ignorance: And a people who mean to be their own
                 Governors, must arm themselves with the power which
                 knowledge gives."
                 If the press are unwilling or unable to do this research,
                 is it any surprise such revelations going back to 2001
                 are a surprise?
                 Event the senate refused to debate it in 2006 when Edward
                 Kennedy and Patrick Leahy brought to the floor. "On
                 January 20, 2006, Senator Patrick Leahy (D-VT), the
                 ranking Democrat on the Senate Judiciary Committee along
                 with lone co-sponsor Senator Ted Kennedy (D-MA)
                 introduced S. Res. 350, a resolution "expressing the
                 sense of the Senate that Senate Joint Resolution 23
                 (107th Congress), as adopted by the Senate on September
                 14, 2001, and subsequently enacted as the Authorization
                 for Use of Military Force does not authorize warrantless
                 domestic surveillance of United States citizens."[54][55]
                 This non-binding resolution died in the Senate without
                 being brought up for debate or being voted upon.[56]"
                 [249]http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NSA_warrantless_surveil
                 lance_%282001%E2%80%9307%29 Accessed 12 July 2013
                 I discuss this and other issues in my post here:
                 [250]http://lawrenceserewicz.wordpress.com/2013/07/17/why
                 -we-have-surveillance/
                 The government is talking but who is listening?
                    # joe says:
                      [251]August 13, 2013 at 8:06 am
                      There is a good question buried in here -- but it's
                      buried under pseudo-intellectual balderdash.
                      What Lawrence is implying, is why did the media
                      deign to allow the argument to come forward at all
                      now? Is it due to the extraordinary act by Snowden
                      which put the information in a format accessible to
                      the press, which is composed of folks with
                      undergraduate journalism degrees, which is just a
                      step up from getting a teaching degree at most
                      universities? (Sorry for the snobbery, but it is the
                      truth).
                      Or is this the side effect of a bigger fight under
                      covers -- that a fight internal to the intelligence
                      services is coming out through the press, maybe
                      purely political and maybe ideological; maybe in
                      fact someone(s) within the system are even upset by
                      the implications of the power handed to them.
                      But the problem is that those questions are
                      indeterminate. They are about conspiracies, which
                      even if they do exist, we lack sufficient data to
                      determine them to any useful extent.
                      So we should talk about what we do know -- which is
                      the data that has come out from the whistleblowers,
                      rather than get distracted by the agendas of others.
                      And that is why this "but whadda about the
                      conspiracy" is pseudo-intellectual balderdash.
                         @ [252]Lawrence Serewicz says:
                           [253]August 13, 2013 at 1:18 pm
                           Two comments. First, most people live in 1D,
                           they see life as linear some in 2D, they see
                           some nuance, they are usually around politics,
                           and there are some who live in 3D. They are, as
                           someone once said, the people in washington who
                           can shape a policy without leaving
                           fingerprints. This is not a conspiracy, it is
                           how people influence events. If you wanted to
                           get something disclosed you would make sure
                           that Mr. Snowden and Mr. Greenwald met. Mr.
                           Greenwald was not going to go to the Senate or
                           tell Mr. Snowden to go talk to the NSA. If
                           someone can aid and abet that meeting,
                           especially indirectly, that is something to
                           consider. Look at how book advances worth
                           millions are brokered for the President and
                           others. Or look at how Rahmn Emmanuel made a
                           lot of money, in a field he knew nothing about,
                           yet it gave him the financial position to run
                           for office. All the companies he worked for
                           went bankrupt and the records are not
                           accessible. You can arrange someone to get a
                           payment without paying them. I recall that G.
                           Gordon Liddy (a convicted felon) owns no
                           weapons, but his wife is an avid gun collector.
                           These are not conspiracies, these are how
                           people get things done.
                           Second point, the issue was not whether the
                           press let the discussion happen, it is why is
                           it ahistorical. I appreciate that Mr. Greenwald
                           is a master of self-promotion and has done an
                           excellent job of promoting himself and the
                           "scoop". (Congratulations on the book deal) My
                           concern is that the debate and reporting has
                           been seen without historical roots. Why? The
                           issue is not a conspiracy, nor is it about the
                           material disclosed, it is why the press (this
                           is a media blog after all) lack a historical
                           perspective on this issue.
                         @ [254]Jay Rosen says:
                           [255]August 13, 2013 at 1:50 pm
                           "Or look at how Rahmn Emmanuel made a lot of
                           money, in a field he knew nothing about, yet it
                           gave him the financial position to run for
                           office. All the companies he worked for went
                           bankrupt and the records are not accessible."
                           Now you are just spreading wrong information
                           and I am not allowing that.
                           Rahm Emanuel went to work for Wasserstein
                           Perella & Company in 1998. It's true that he
                           did not have a background in finance. He had a
                           rolodex and Washington connections of obvious
                           use. He worked on Mergers and Acquisitions
                           (deals) and helped bring in clients.
                           Wasserstein Perella & Company was sold in 2001
                           to Dresdner Bank of Germany for $1.4 billion.
                           It did not go bankrupt. You simply made that
                           up. You cannot do that on this site. You will
                           not be allowed to disinform the readers of what
                           I write. Who do you think you are? Some kind of
                           cypto-operative? Go away. Don't come back.
                           [256]http://online.barrons.com/article/SB122973
                           324821923181.html
                           [257]http://www.nytimes.com/2008/12/04/us/polit
                           ics/04emanuel.html?pagewanted=all
                         @ joe says:
                           [258]August 16, 2013 at 4:14 am
                           "This is not a conspiracy, it is how people
                           influence events. "
                           Conspiracy: a combination of persons for a
                           secret, unlawful, or evil purpose.
                           Yeah, those aren't examples of super-genius
                           "3d" thinking (gaad, you're an insufferable
                           twit), but conspiracies. The world is full of
                           them, it's how the world works, but to claim
                           them without having evidence is just one more
                           propaganda technique. You throw dirt at your
                           opponents, or you make an entire area of
                           inquiry ridiculous by making outlandish,
                           evidence free claims -- or a combination of
                           `em.
                           It's not particularly clever. Any idiot can use
                           it, with some minimal training. What's next,
                           we're going to get a disinfo campaign about how
                           the UFO's are behind Snowden? Or the reptile
                           lords? Or how Snowden is actually a plant by
                           Putin? Or that the teabaggers are working with
                           Rahm and the Reptile Lords in Kenya?
                           If you have some evidence of a particular
                           conspiracy, everyone is all ears. But vague
                           claims that "someone may have helped someone
                           meet" is information free, useless and
                           irrelevant. It's an attempt to get people to
                           take their eye off the ball, in a fairly
                           transparent way, which of course like all
                           rhetorical devices works very well when someone
                           isn't paying attention.
                           Super crypto-operative indeed.
          + proximity1 says:
            [259]August 13, 2013 at 6:17 am
            ..."why is it the public only take notice when the press
            publicize the issue?"
            Excuse me but it's very late in the game to be posing such a
            question. Are you serious there? Can it really have escaped
            your notice that generally, and in the U.S. in particular,
            people are living in a sea of consumer-media distractions,
            purpose-made to keep them in a semi-dazed state of
            entertainment-besottedness?
            That doesn't even inlude the other factors of contemporary
            life which make following social and political affairs a
            nearly full-time task. Companies pay fortunes to full-time
            expert lobbies because in our circumstances, it requires that
            to stay abreast of and at par with the other competing actors
            in the struggle to manage and shape public policy and public
            opinion.
            There is no mystery about how and why an average person is
            nearly lost and helpless in trying to stay adequately informed
            through the dense thicket of mis- & dis-information. Things
            are that way because, all around, this so well serves the
            interests of the class of privileged who can pay for
            professional lobbyists and use that tremendous advantage
            against the rest of us who cannot.
            And, that said, I'm frequently amazed at the incredibly stupid
            and useless stuff that soaks up hours of radio-broadcast
            time-time which, in theory, could be devoted to giving the
            public a good background in the actualities of political
            affairs. There are programs which purport to do that, of
            course, but they are without exception, highly stylized and
            managed to avoid just the sort of brush-clearing explanations
            which I'm saying mass-broadcast-media have always failed to
            present except in the most exceptional circumstances.
            Corporate sponsorship is the mainstay factor in keeping things
            this way.
            In France, where the majority of the radio broadcasting is
            still under the aegis of the state's operations, the situation
            is no different or better. The best analysis radio, while much
            better than most things aird in the U.S., is still
            pathetically lacking in the needed content. In commercial
            radio, it's simply not worth tuning in at all. Though I listen
            from time to time to a 24H business-news station ( "B-FM" :
            [260]http://bfm.radio.fr/ (they also have a television arm of
            their coporate propaganda machine) just for occasional
            refreshers in the stunning propaganda which the public is
            treated to in matters of finance and corporate politics. It's
            amazing.
   39. [261]Lawrence Serewicz says:
       [262]August 12, 2013 at 11:29 am
       Sorry, I missed out the article on the retroactive immunity for
       telecommunications providers.
       [263]http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/intel/RL34600.pdf
   40. proximity1 says:
       [264]August 13, 2013 at 7:10 am
       RE: "The public never got its day in court."
       link: Spencer Ackerman article @ The Guardian, U.K. : "Intelligence
       committee withheld key file before critical NSA vote, Amash claims"
       [265]http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/12/intelligence-comm
       ittee-nsa-vote-justin-amash
   41. proximity1 says:
       [266]August 16, 2013 at 9:57 am
       RE : Joe, from post @ August 16, 2013 at 4:24 am
       While I'm sure that Michiel can answer ably for himself, I have
       these comments in response to your post.
       I think there's confusion going on here, but I'm not sure I
       understand your views well enough from what you've written to
       pinpoint it.

     The "pragmatic" public choice I'm talking about isn't public virtue
     that you can't live up to. It's a pragmatic immoral act that
     contravenes your private morals. It's the inverse of hypocrisy,
     where you fulfill your evil public duty yet save your personal
     virtue because you're kind to neighbors, dogs and small children.
       I don't understand what you mean by "private morals" (or "public
       virture" either, by the way) unless you refer to the moral aspects
       of private acts-as distinguished from public acts, I suppose. But
       I'm still confused as the relevance of this to the matters
       discussed.

     That's not what Jay is doing. He is playing a rhetorical game -- but
     claiming that he isn't "for" or "against" Snowden is merely a
     rhetorical ploy. It's not an evil act against his innermost heart
     that he does as a pragmatic requirement of the day. It's just
     setting the stage for a conversation.
       Again, like Michiel, J.R. can speak for himself better than anyone
       else on this point; my own reading, though, was not at all that he
       was engaged in anything that could be described as a deliberate
       (conscious) ploy on his part-rhetorical or otherwise.
       I think people over-philosophize about the "banality of evil" from
       Arendt's writings about Eichmann in Jerusalem. For me, the plain
       fact is that there's no particular need or cause for stressing the
       fact that "evil" acts, acts which violate a moral imperative, are
       often done (most often done) by average people-there are so many
       more of us, after all-and that agents of great evil needn't be
       "great men and women" in appearance or otherwise. Why these
       everyday truths should have been the source of such comment and
       controversy circa 1960s with the trial of Eichmann is a mystery to
       me. Arendt apparently was not prepared to find so unimpressive a
       man in the defendant's box of the courtroom. I have never
       understood why she should have thought so.
       I read Jay's comments as meaning that he and anyone may be, for
       quite good reasons, neutral as to the matter of "Snowden-'pro' or
       `con' the person as opposed to what he did?" even as he argued,
       rightly, I thought, the moral obligations of reporters to support,
       on professional principles, acts by which official
       wrong-doing-criminal acts, esp.-is divulged, made publicly known.
       As I see it, the one logically and morally implies the other.
       Jay has explained that his objective is to keep faith with E.
       Snowden's own desire that he, Snowden, not become the focus of most
       or all of the public debate. I think this danger, once quite a
       valid concern, is now rather behind us.
       Still, so many critics of Snowden have argued that "going to Hong
       Kong" or to Moscow was not a morally respectable course-usually
       expressed as "not heroic."
       My reaction to these complaints-besides their being so full of
       disingenuity-is that Snowden does many things everyday which have
       nothing to do with his heroism-which he expressly disclaims, by the
       way. When he makes breakfast or goes to buy groceries, he does
       these things, too, "unheroically." So, yeah, flight to Hong Kong or
       Moscow isn't of itself heroic. Neither is brushing one's teeth.
       But, to live and to make one's way in the world, one has to make
       breakfast, do the shopping and brush one's teeth; and Edward
       Snowden, to do them and everything else, had to leave the U.S.
       because he had the plain common sense to recognize that everything
       else he might do as a free individual, depended on his doing that-
       and all that came afterward was obviously premised on it. These are
       practical matters and issues and it is for them, as practical
       matters, that I believe, as a practical matter, that I'm morally
       obliged to support not just the acts of whistle-blowers but the
       whistle-blowers themselves, as real people who flee, who fear, who
       do many things, with or without heroism involved not least because
       these people as individuals and not only what they have done or are
       alleged to have done, are under attack by those who want to find,
       silence and punish them. It's not only what they did which must be
       defended by the public, it's they, themselves, as people.
          + Michiel Jonker says:
            [267]August 16, 2013 at 6:20 pm
            I just commented on these last contributions of Jay Rosen and
            Joe in the subthread where they made them.
               o proximity1 says:
                 [268]August 17, 2013 at 1:51 pm
                 Thank you. I read them.

     Michiel Jonker:
     August 16, 2013 at 6:14 pm
     @Joe (August 16 at 4:24 AM)
     I think you are making things needlessly complex, and that this
     contribution of yours is not entirely coherent.
                 I agree there.
                 But, alas, I disagree with some of your explanations of
                 the thinking behind Arendt's take on Eichmann and the
                 Enlightenment's part in the background of that. I think
                 you are oversimplifying that immense period and the
                 varied thinking that it carried and left us. In any case,
                 my point was with regard to one individual's attitude
                 toward evil as a phenomenon-that of Hannah Arendt and
                 whether or not it stands up to scrutiny in the context of
                 this discussion- and her use of Eichmann as a model
                 example for the more general case she was making- and not
                 the Englightment movement as a whole and the philosophers
                 in it.
                    # Michiel Jonker says:
                      [269]August 17, 2013 at 3:52 pm
                      You write: "But, alas, I disagree with some of your
                      explanations of the thinking behind Arendt's take on
                      Eichmann and the Enlightenment's part in the
                      background of that. I think you are oversimplifying
                      that immense period and the varied thinking that it
                      carried and left us."
                      You are absolutely right that I did not pretend to
                      offer more than a hint of one of the many possible
                      approaches to an explanation.
                      About half a year ago I became the proud owner of
                      "Democratic Enlightenment - Philosophy, Revolution,
                      and Human Rights 1750-1790'' by Jonathan I. Israel
                      (950 pages excluding endnotes etc.). It grins at me,
                      intimidatingly.
                      With "The Toobin Principle" Jay Rosen refers to the
                      repression by journalists of the daunting
                      self-knowledge that they have decided to give up the
                      ideal of a well-informed public, thereby also giving
                      up the ideal of a functioning democracy. Those are
                      ideals stemming from the Enlightenment. They are
                      bound up with optimism about the possibility of
                      social and political advance through the exercise of
                      reason. That is why I thought my flimsy approach
                      forgivable.
                         @ Michiel Jonker says:
                           [270]August 18, 2013 at 4:49 am
                           Oops, sorry, the book has no endnotes, only
                           footnotes. And a bibliography (75 p.) and an
                           index...
                    # Michiel Jonker says:
                      [271]August 18, 2013 at 6:07 am
                      @Proximity1 (August 17 at 1:51 PM, again)
                      Thanks for making me have a look at "Democratic
                      Enlightenment" (Jonathan I. Israel) again. I can't
                      resist quoting some passages that confirm your
                      remark about the variedness of Enlightenment
                      thinking:
                      "Like Hume, Adam Smith, Montesquieu, and Voltaire,
                      [Adam] Ferguson [1723-1816] did not deny the need
                      for improvements and to make society better. (...)
                      But his Enlightenment sought to retain most of the
                      existing foundations, walls, and roof in place at
                      any one time, making only gradual, step-by-step, and
                      carefully restricted changes without taking `away so
                      much of your supports at once as that the roof may
                      fall in'. If attitudes needed transforming
                      extensively, the basic structure of government, law,
                      and administration, as he saw it, and the main lines
                      of social hierarchy, should remain in place. Most
                      great figures of the Scots Enlightenment thought
                      similarly. The one major exception was the
                      republican-minded and remarkable John Millar
                      (1735-1801), author of *The Origin of the
                      Distinction of Ranks* (1771), an enlightener
                      powerfully infused with a sense of the need to
                      weaken aristocracy and push forward much more
                      vigorously the emancipation of women, slaves, serfs,
                      and the non-privileged generally. (...) Equally,
                      eighteenth-century science divided between those who
                      saw the laws of physics, biology, and chemistry as
                      divinely given, laws conceived, as Newton, and still
                      more his disciples, had, within a framework of
                      physico-theology, and those who saw no evidence of
                      anything but the operation of purely physical
                      forces. (...) Minds, as Turgot formulated in his
                      metaphysical dualism and Lockean psychology, are
                      determined (...) not by mechanical causes but in
                      pursuit of final causes. (...)"
                      "Throughout the history of the Enlightenment,
                      whether we approach it from a scientific, religious,
                      or political standpoint, this fundamental and
                      irresolvable duality between the created and
                      providential and non-created and non-providential
                      schemes of reality was so important that it
                      generally remained the chief factor shaping the
                      Enlightenment's course. It is the starting point of
                      the characteristically modern split between those
                      who think in termms of science versus religion, as
                      against the plea that science and religion do not
                      conflict but stand in harmony, as well as the start
                      of the equally basic modern split between `right'
                      and `left' in politics and social theory. (...)"
                      "On one side was a body of thought maintaining that
                      `reason', meaning inference and argument based on
                      physical and mathematical evidence only, is the sole
                      criterion of truth, the exclusive guide in our
                      affairs, and sole means of understanding the human
                      condition. On the other stood the mainstream
                      Enlightenment refusing this exclusive privileging of
                      `reason' and claiming two fundamental and distinct
                      sources of truth, namely reason and religious
                      authority (or alternatively tradition). True
                      Enlightenment, held this camp, asserts the harmony
                      between these. (...)"
                      "Reason depending for its sway on reasoning, debate,
                      and argument, Radical Enlightenment unreservedly
                      endorsed freedom of expression, thought, and the
                      press, seeing this as what best aids discussion and
                      investigation, through debate, law-making, and
                      social amelioration, claiming `we shall never
                      experience how far human reason can reach in the
                      sphere of general truths', as Diez, the first German
                      proponent of full freedom of the press, put it in
                      1781, `if we restrict or wholly refuse freedom of
                      thought'. Against this, both moderate and still more
                      the Counter-Enlightenment stream retained (or
                      re-introduced) permanent elements of thought
                      policing and censorship. (...) the mainstreama
                      subordinated human affairs, morality, marriage, and
                      society generally to what was deemed the divinely
                      created and revealed physical and moral order."
                      (From: Democratic Enlightenment, pp. 17-20)
                      These texts about Enlightenment place the "Toobin
                      Principle" and the behaviour of the NSA in a special
                      light (no pun intended). One could argue that the
                      huge spying activities of the NSA are in harmony
                      with "mainstream Enlightenment of the eighteenth
                      century" because this continuous spying on all
                      citizens is legitimized by a divinely created order
                      that requires thought policing and censorship.
                      This argument would relieve poor Mr. Toobin of the
                      need to stay unconscious of his own decision as a
                      journalist not to deem a well-informed public
                      desirable anymore. Without repressing anything
                      (except the US citizens) anymore, the NSA, Obama and
                      figures like Toobin could openly advocate that the
                      USA reverts to a form of government that existed
                      prior to the American and the French revolutions.
                      They could claim that democracy, civil rights and
                      freedom of the press are aberrations, caused by
                      "radical" Enlightenment, which should be curbed,
                      because... well, because American presidents are in
                      fact appointed by God, Who only uses the voters, the
                      big corporations and the NSA as His instruments in
                      order to implement His policies.
                      Stalin and Hitler would smile from their graves.
                      They would not mind God being invoked - a mere
                      detail in the execution of power. They knew that
                      their legacy would not get lost, in the end. They
                      always knew THEY were much more mainstream than
                      western democracy.
                         @ proximity1 says:
                           [272]August 22, 2013 at 7:41 am
                           Now it's my turn to thank you -for your
                           comments and for the reference to "Democratic
                           Enlightenment" (Jonathan I. Israel). I'll make
                           a point to look for and read this text.
                           I owe the bulk of what I have in interpretation
                           of the Enlightenment to historian Peter Gay's
                           writings-mainly his two-volume work, "The
                           Enlightenment" `The Rise of Modern Paganism'
                           and `The Science of Freedom'-have marked me and
                           have been one of the springs of my reading
                           direction for over thirty years.
                           As I see it, as in our times, the Enlightenment
                           period was a raging debate over the most
                           fundamental issues of freedom and all aspects
                           of human affairs in political society and was
                           conducted by some brilliant minds. With it,
                           there was-as you mention- at every point, a
                           Counter-Enlightenment view and its proponents
                           rejected the fundamental assumptions-such as
                           there were-which were generally shared more or
                           less as a basic view by most of the major
                           Enlightenment figures. Of course, there were
                           some differences in their emphases, in the way
                           they used and intended certain terms. But, with
                           that a basic consensus formed among the two
                           warring camps- Enlightenment and
                           Counter-Enlightenment thinkers, which historian
                           Zeev Sternhell refers to as the
                           "Anti-Enlightenment", which, in our time, he
                           writes, included Isaiah Berlin, among others.
                           Also, thanks to and based on my reading of
                           Peter Gay's history, I see the Enlightenment
                           figures facing a central set of problems:
                           they sought to oppose two intimately related
                           forces, monarchical hereditary rule and its
                           "co-conspirator," The Church, which offered the
                           basic rationale of divine authority for both
                           monarchy and the Church itself.
                           The problem was to reject these standing
                           authorities without completely rejecting
                           authority itself as being founded on something.
                           The solution most agreed on was to appeal to
                           "reason" as the new and superior source of
                           authority and to insist that both monarchy and
                           The Church were antithetical to right reason.
                           This opened an intense investigation into what
                           reason was, where it was, why it was and how it
                           operated. Opinions on these were diverse and
                           conflicting. Some opposed "reason" and
                           "passion", others argued that they were
                           inseparably linked and, that, for the better
                           more than for the worse, though somewhat for
                           the worse came with a circumstance that was,
                           they argued, a "given" of human nature.
                           One problem is that "reason" is not a "gift"
                           bestowed on humanity, something firm, fixed and
                           readily manageable; it's quality of human and
                           other life. It is fluid, as are all aspects of
                           the nervous system; a product of continuously
                           emergent and changing biological operations in
                           sense-data reception and interpretation and
                           construction. The Enlightenment's philosophers
                           needed but didn't have our modern advances in
                           understanding of neurobiology. We have these
                           advances but, in politics and in economics,
                           most people, even leading figures, either don't
                           know or don't apply this knowledge and remain,
                           for that, in a situation which is similarly
                           impoverished. [ An aside: The work of
                           biologists in the developing study of
                           "Stochastic Gene Expression" (SGE) should
                           eventually place all of our efforts in these
                           areas under a new set of interpretive
                           imperatives. See, for example, the work of
                           Jean-Jacques KUPIEC (
                           [273]http://www.canceropole-idf.fr/sites/defaul
                           t/files/manifestations/sem2013-kpole-colloque/s
                           em2013-kpole-colloque-12-kupiec.pdf ) and that
                           of others who have taken the progress gained
                           and applied it to their analyses of human
                           social and political affairs, as Jean-Paul
                           Baquiast has done in his book, Le paradoxe du
                           sapiens - Êtres technologiques et catastrophes
                           annoncées , the preface of which was
                           contributed by Jean-Jacques Kupiec.]
                           Since these social and moral issues-the legacy
                           of the Enlightenment- cannot be escaped, but,
                           rather, only ignored (to our peril), they have
                           always remained there right in the midst of all
                           we try to do in practical social
                           philosophizing. It's better that we take the
                           issues up quite deliberately and face them than
                           that we try and avoid them. All our current
                           controversies and dilemmas are closely
                           concerned with the central topics of the
                           Enlightenment's protagonists-who didn't resolve
                           things in any definitive way probably because
                           that is not possible to do; but they did
                           produce and leave to us a wealth of important
                           work on the matters which still plague us.
                           We should use it as we continue to work on
                           issues which, due to a world technologically
                           remade, is not responsive to the provisional
                           working `solutions', political and philosophic
                           and economic, to which they came more or less
                           differently to adhere.
                           The recent writing of Georges Corm is extremely
                           interesting as a review and reinterpretation of
                           how the Enlightenment's legacy has helped or
                           hindered our contemporary understanding of our
                           political problems' roots.
          + Michiel Jonker says:
            [274]August 17, 2013 at 4:07 am
            @Proximity1 (August 16 at 9:57 AM)
            I agree with almost all of your comment here. Especially your
            last four paragraphs.
            Still, a few notes.
            (1) You write: "Again, like Michiel, J.R. can speak for
            himself better than anyone else on this point; my own reading,
            though, was not at all that he was engaged in anything that
            could be described as a deliberate (conscious) ploy on his
            part-rhetorical or otherwise."
            I think that Jay Rosen, as a professional in the field of
            journalism and as a "craftsman", was and is well aware that
            everything he writes in this blog, has a rhetorical dimension.
            But I agree with you, that Jay probably was quite sincere when
            he said that he was not "for" or "against" Snowden - not using
            a rhetorical "ploy".
            However, we will never be sure. Where one's own consciousness
            and the wish (or drive) to convince others meet each other in
            one's own head, everything is kind of fluid. Things are hard
            to pin down there, even for oneself.
            It is in this fluid territory of the mind that real moral
            choices are made, or "born". It is also in this territory that
            reality as we perceive it, is moulded to fit our needs.
            In this part of their mind, power-hungry people create a
            perception of reality that gives them a reason to commit their
            power-hungry deeds. In the same way, people who are afraid
            create a perception of reality that justifies their behaviour.
            (2) You write: "I think people over-philosophize about the
            "banality of evil" from Arendt's writings about Eichmann in
            Jerusalem. For me, the plain fact is that there's no
            particular need or cause for stressing the fact that "evil"
            acts, acts which violate a moral imperative, are often done
            (most often done) by average people-there are so many more of
            us, after all-and that agents of great evil needn't be "great
            men and women" in appearance or otherwise. Why these everyday
            truths should have been the source of such comment and
            controversy circa 1960s with the trial of Eichmann is a
            mystery to me. Arendt apparently was not prepared to find so
            unimpressive a man in the defendant's box of the courtroom. I
            have never understood why she should have thought so."
            I think the explanation has in part to do with the
            Enlightenment ideal of, and optimism about man as a reasonable
            being. In this view, a person with great mental faculties can
            be expected to use them well and make a great career on the
            basis of his merits as a reasonable being.
            So in this view, when a person reaches a high position in
            society (especially: in government), also implying a high
            responsibility, this person can be expected to have a
            well-developed, "great" reasonability, which also means: not
            looking for cowardly, superficial, insincere excuses to cover
            his ass when doing terrible things (like Eichmann did).
            Enlightenment expectations about the role of reasonability
            tend to be a bit romantic.
            In the 1960s these expectations were still alive, in spite of
            what had happened in the Second World War, in the form of
            ideals (leading to student and hippie movements), and in the
            form of partly unconscious assumptions and norms about human
            reasonability and decency. In the second half of the 1970s,
            these assumptions started to submerge gradually - in the same
            time when neoliberalism started its rise, which would last
            fourty years (until the economic crisis that started in 2008).
            I remember the ominous feeling I got in 1980, when I heard
            that Reagan had been elected. I saw how certain people around
            me started to clothe themselves differently and talk in a
            different way, in that same year. Harder, less empathic, less
            merciful. I wondered what was happening. From that time on I
            tried, rather clumsily, to keep my own ideals alive in my way
            of behaving.
            Since then, I've met many people who did not succumb to the
            moral downturn, but did their work and lived their lives with
            empathy, sincerity and integrity. But during the last fourty
            years, they have not represented the dominant drift in
            society. Very sad. I can only hope that some kind of turning
            point is approaching.
               o Michiel Jonker says:
                 [275]August 17, 2013 at 4:40 am
                 Correction: "fourty years" for duration of rise of
                 neoliberalism should be: "thirty years".
          + JOE says:
            [276]August 17, 2013 at 9:16 am
            Regarding the banality of evil: I see that discussion often
            abused, reduced to some kind of banal hypocrisy. Arendt's
            point, in my view, was that a great evil was indeed done, but
            by a person who justified it in the most banal of ways. Not
            just following order, but "simply doing my job". Eichmann's
            actual monstrosity was masked by claiming a banal personal
            virtue, that he paid his rent, was a good neighbor, went to
            work and just did his job, making no moral judgment on his
            context.
            This is a very chronic disease, the disease of pragmatism as a
            cover for a great inner immorality, and I believe that it
            underlies a great deal of this column, to get back to Toobin.
            All of this is possible only because people, unlike Snowden,
            can be banally evil. They take acts as agents, public acts,
            which are counter to the ideals they claim privately. They're
            "good liberals" or some such principled stand, except that in
            practice and in substance they're entire careers undermine
            that.
            Look at Palantir (the company), for example. The top guys are
            a hippy liberal stoner philosopher, and a libertarian
            businessman -- and I don't doubt that is how they relate
            personally with friends and family. But in public, they're
            running one of the major spying infrastructures, and use their
            "personal ideals" to escape responsibility from their public
            actions.
            Jay's rhetoric isn't that kind of thing. He's not doing some
            great evil that requires this many lines of analysis. At best,
            the appropriate response is "Sersly? The view from nowhere
            doesn't work here."
            Important moral choices are being made. This isn't one of
            them.
            @Joinkers:
            As long as folks see themselves as merely consumers, who's
            labor is simply a means to maximize that consumption, things
            ain't going to get better. If you're just a rational market
            player, then you're not actually a moral entity. There's your
            banality of evil, a chain of agents that never end in someone
            who takes responsibility, a collection of monads simply
            responding to their environment.
               o proximity1 says:
                 [277]August 17, 2013 at 1:34 pm
                 I think that the matter of the character of evil as
                 "banal" or something else is a very unproductive
                 focus-but, paradoxically, the reasons why I believe that
                 to be the case are, in my opinion, worth discussion if we
                 found the proper time and venue for it.
                 I don't think this thread is necessarily that venue-but I
                 do think that this preoccupation with whether it's useful
                 and interesting to debate evil and a banality of it has
                 serious implications for the issues we are concerned with
                 here.
                 To do the matter justice, I'd have to dig out my copy of
                 Eichmann in Jerusalem for a review of the arguments
                 there. And, while I expect to come across it soon, for
                 other reasons, I won't have time in the near term. All my
                 comments on the issue have been off the cuff, based on my
                 general views of the issues, and without having had
                 recourse to Arendt's book.
                 Last point- you're assuming, wrongly I think, I (or
                 Michiel) are working from an assumption that Jay is some
                 sort of model of bad moral conduct.
                 So, when you write,
                 "He's (Jay) not doing some great evil that requires this
                 many lines of analysis,"
                 my reaction is, Indeed, he isn't and, by the way, no one
                 here has even implied this, let alone alleged it
                 directly.
                 Your comments strike me as coming from a touchy
                 conscience, if not a somehow somewhat guilty one. I start
                 from the view that Jay and this site are resolutely
                 trying to defend the same causes and principles that I
                 want to defend. Our discussion is over some arguably
                 important details of how to do that.
                 No one that I've seen thinks that Jay's intentions and
                 motives are other than quite respectable and worthy ones.
                    # joe says:
                      [278]August 28, 2013 at 5:02 am
                      It's not a touchy conscience or any such
                      psychological issues -- it's being touchy towards
                      what may be "concern trolling". Look above to find
                      some examples of that kind of gamesmanship.
                      Of course, that's one of the evils of concern
                      trolling -- that it creates that kind of touchiness,
                      which then derails good-faith arguments. In the end,
                      open discussion is destroyed by the bad players.
                      It's a very significant issue for democratic
                      polities that is much underdiscussed.
               o Michiel Jonker says:
                 [279]August 17, 2013 at 2:02 pm
                 For the most part, I can follow your interpretation of
                 what "the banality of evil" means. One point though: the
                 banality in question does not only manifest itself in the
                 JUSTIFICATION of evil, but also in the evil ITSELF.
                 Possibly, you point to the same thing when you write:
                 "...pragmatism as a cover for a great INNER IMMORALITY"
                 [emphasis mine].
                 So what is this evil, this inner immorality that can be
                 great and banal at the same time? And what are the
                 "roots" of it? I think the roots of it are small and
                 often banal, and I recognize them also in myself, and
                 even in small children. Ever seen a two-year-old grabbing
                 the toy of another two-year-old and pushing him away?
                 There's your root of evil.
                 Roots of evil are important, because by identifying them
                 early on, we can sometimes prevent great evil from
                 happening.
                 You mention Jay's rhetoric and then you state: "He's not
                 doing some great evil that requires this many lines of
                 analysis. (...) Important moral choices are being made.
                 This isn't one of them."
                 I'm not going to duplicate the discussion we are having
                 further up on this same thread. I agree with you that Jay
                 is not doing some great evil. But I still think that he
                 makes an important moral choice. The choice to distance
                 himself, as a journalist, from Snowden's moral view of
                 things, by disclaiming any position in relation to it. In
                 some cases, "not making a choice" means that one also
                 makes a choice. This is such a case.
                 The choice that Jay makes with his disclaimer (not being
                 "for" or "against" Snowden) is a choice for a beginning
                 (a "root") of indifference. Keeping a door open for an
                 opt-out if things get really difficult. Indifference, in
                 its turn, can be a root of evil. The indifference of many
                 people in Europe about the fate of those who were
                 persecuted by the Nazis (Jews, other ethnic or cultural
                 groups, homosexuals, critical people) enabled the Nazis
                 to do what they did. The indifference was partly born
                 from fear, and it led to people looking away, not wanting
                 to see what was happening.
                 Small choices can have great moral significance. I'm
                 convinced that Keith Alexander and Barack Obama made many
                 small immoral choices, which gradually solidified them
                 into very dishonest men.
                 Now about Jay's choice. There is a difference between, on
                 the one hand, Jay Rosen and almost all other journalists,
                 and on the other hand, Snowden, Greenwald and a few other
                 whistleblowers and journalists. This is NOT the
                 difference between "the Fourth Estate as a state of mind"
                 (see the latest blog on this site) and the state of mind
                 of institutionalized journalists and employees. It is
                 clear Jay belongs to this "Fourth Estate" at this moment.
                 The choice of Jay that I have criticized, concerns a
                 difference WITHIN "the Fourth Estate": the difference
                 between those who jump into the water and swim, and those
                 who stay on the riverbank and throw lifejackets at the
                 swimmers.
                 Both functions are necessary and valuable. But choosing
                 whether to swim or not, is an important moral choice.
                 Without swimmers, the child (a "well-informed public",
                 democracy, rule of law) will drown.
                 I'm not one of the swimmers anymore. I'm trying to climb
                 back on the land. I've learned some lessons about my
                 limitations as a swimmer. And of course no-one can swim
                 forever. Still, I'm proud that I was a swimmer for some
                 time. And I'm happy to see the actions of a magnificent
                 swimmer like Snowden. I hope that people in Jay's
                 position will have the courage to say publicly: "Go,
                 Snowden, go! It's good what you have done, and what you
                 are doing!" I don't expect Jay to swim. But he might at
                 least step into the water, letting it play around his
                 ankles.
                 Regarding your last remark: I totally agree with you that
                 the people whom you call "rational market players", for
                 instance in the guise of "consumers" who are indifferent
                 to the damage caused by their collective consumption
                 patterns, manifest one form of "the banality of evil".
                 However, they ARE moral entities. They just don't want to
                 make the right choices - yet.
                    # Michiel Jonker says:
                      [280]August 22, 2013 at 11:06 am
                      P.S. I just read Jay's latest post, "Conspiracy to
                      commit journalism" (20 August). There, Jay contrasts
                      "sunlight coalitions" defending transparency and
                      public information with authoritarian, secretive
                      "surveillance-over-everything_forces".
                      I must say, in this later post Jay comes close to
                      "letting the water play around his ankles", because
                      he mentiones "sources" as one category of people
                      (along with journalists, couriers, readers who write
                      comments etc.) who form part of these "sunlight
                      coalitions". It is clear that he uses "sources" as a
                      code-word, not only for official sources (government
                      spokespeople etc.), but also for whistleblowers,
                      leakers of information etc. So he clearly values the
                      contribution of these last people to transparency,
                      public information and accountability of
                      governments.
                      However, Jay still does not explicitly mention
                      "whistleblowers" (like Snowden) as members of the
                      "sunlight coalitions" who fight for saving
                      democracy. Why this strange reluctance?
                         @ Michiel Jonker says:
                           [281]August 26, 2013 at 4:22 pm
                           26 August: new post from Jay Rosen, describing
                           how the global surveillance state tries: "To
                           make journalism harder, slower, less secure"
                           Last sentence: "Journalism almost has to be
                           brought closer to activism to stand a chance of
                           prevailing in its current struggle with the
                           state."
                           Yes! Now Jay comes ("almost") very close to
                           explicit approval of Snowden's moral choice and
                           action. Touching the water with the sole of his
                           foot...
                           What Snowden did, can be regarded as part of
                           the work of a very, very brave undercover
                           journalist: penetrating a powerful organisation
                           that had turned criminal, exposing its legal
                           façade for what it is: a façade.

   « [282]The rise of the personal franchise site in news
   [283]Edward Snowden, meet Jeff Bezos »
     * Introduction
       "We need to keep the press from being absorbed into The Media. This
       means keeping the word press, which is antiquated. But included
       under its modern umbrella should be all who do the serious work in
       journalism, regardless of the technology used. The people who will
       invent the next press in America--and who are doing it now
       online--continue an experiment at least 250 years old. It has a
       powerful social history and political legend attached..." [284]Read
       more
     * Switchboard
          + [285]Email PressThink
          + [286]Follow JR on Google+
          + [287]Follow JR on Twitter
          + [288]Journalism at NYU
          + [289]Links recently shared
          + [290]Podcast with Dave Winer
          + [291]Posterous: Public Notebook
          + [292]RSS
          + [293]Study with Jay: Studio 20
          + [294]Where PressThink is Coming From
     * Recent Entries
          + [295]The BBC's 16 questions to Glenn Greenwald
          + [296]The production of innocence and the reporting of American
            politics
          + [297]PressThink is ten years old. To celebrate I'm asking its
            readers to de-lurk. Want to play?
          + [298]To make journalism harder, slower, less secure
          + [299]Conspiracy to commit journalism
          + [300]When you're in a Fourth Estate situation
          + [301]Edward Snowden, meet Jeff Bezos
          + [302]The Toobin principle
          + [303]The rise of the personal franchise site in news
          + [304]Criticizing CNN: Goodbye to that.
          + [305]The Snowden Effect: definition and examples
          + [306]A few principles for how I operate as a critic
          + [307]David Gregory tries to read Glenn Greenwald and The
            Guardian out of the journalism club
          + [308]No, Candy Crowley. That is not good enough.
          + [309]Politics: some / Politics: none. Two ways to excel in
            political journalism. Neither dominates.
     * Search ____________________ Submit Search
     * Highlights
          + [310]Audience Atomization Overcome: Why the Internet Weakens
            the Authority of the Press "
            In the age of mass media, the press was able to define the
            sphere of legitimate debate with relative ease because the
            people on the receiving end were atomized- connected "up" to
            Big Media but not across to each other. And now that authority
            is eroding. I will try to explain why. It's easily the [...]
            " [311]Read more [312]The People Formerly Known as the
            Audience:
            "You don't own the eyeballs. You don't own the press, which is
            now divided into pro and amateur zones. You don't control
            production on the new platform, which isn't one-way. There's a
            new balance of power between you and us."
            [313]Read more [314]Migration Point for the Press Tribe:
            "Like reluctant migrants everywhere, the people in the news
            tribe have to decide what to take with them. When to leave.
            Where to land. They have to figure out what is essential to
            their way of life. They have to ask if what they know is
            portable."
             [315]Read more [316]Bloggers vs. Journalists is Over:
            "Here is one advantage bloggers have in the struggle for
            reputation- for the user's trust. They are closer to the
            transaction where trust gets built up on the Web. There's a
            big difference between tapping a built-up asset, like the St.
            Pete Times `brand,' and creating it from scratch."
             [317]Read more [318]"Where's the Business Model for News,
            People?"
            "It's remarkable to me how many accomplished producers of
            those goods the future production of which is in doubt are
            still at the stage of asking other people, "How are we going
            to pay our reporters if you guys don't want to pay for our
            news?'"
             [319]Read more [320]National Explainer: A Job for Journalists
            on the Demand Side of News This American Life's great mortgage
            crisis explainer, The Giant Pool of Money, suggests that
            "information" and "explanation" ought to be reversed in our
            order of thought. Especially as we contemplate new news
            systems. [321]Read more [322]The Beast Without a Brain: Why
            Horse Race Journalism Works for Journalists and Fails Us.
            "Just so you know, `the media' has no mind. It cannot make
            decisions. Which means it does not `get behind' candidates. It
            does not decide to oppose your guy... or gal. It is a beast
            without a brain. Most of the time, it doesn't know what it's
            doing.."
             [323]Read more [324]They're Not in Your Club but They Are in
            Your League: Firedoglake at the Libby Trial:
            "I'm just advising Newsroom Joe and Jill: make room for FDL in
            your own ideas about what's coming on, news-wise. Don't let
            your own formula (blog=opinion) fake you out. A conspiracy of
            the like minded to find out what happened when the national
            news media isn't inclined to tell us might be way more
            practical than you think."
             [325]Read more [326]Twilight of the Curmudgeon Class:
            "We're at the twilight of the curmudgeon class in newsrooms
            and J-schools. (Though they can still do a lot of damage.) You
            know they're giving up when they no longer bother to inform
            themselves about what they themselves say is happening."
             [327]Read more [328]Getting the Politics of the Press Right:
            Walter Pincus Rips into Newsroom Neutrality
            "The important thing is to show integrity- not to be a neuter,
            politically. And having good facts that hold up is a bigger
            advantage than claiming to reflect all sides equally well."
             [329]Read more [330]A Most Useful Definition of Citizen
            Journalism
            "It's mine, but it should be yours. Can we take the quote
            marks off now? Can we remove the `so-called' from in front?
            With video!."
             [331]Read more [332]The Master Narrative in Journalism:
            "Were `winning' to somehow be removed or retired as the
            operating system for news, campaign reporting would
            immediately become harder to do, not because there would be no
            news, but rather no common, repeatable instructions for
            deciding what is a key development in the story, a turning
            point, a surprise, a trend. Master narratives are thus harder
            to alter than they are to apprehend. For how do you keep the
            story running while a switch is made?"
             [333]Read more [334]He Said, She Said Journalism: Lame
            Formula in the Land of the Active User
            "Any good blogger, competing journalist or alert press critic
            can spot and publicize false balance and the lame acceptance
            of fact-free spin. Do users really want to be left helpless in
            sorting out who's faking it more? The he said, she said form
            says they do, but I say decline has set in."
             [335]Read more [336]Users-Know-More-than-We-Do Journalism:
            "It's a "put up or shut up" moment for open source methods in
            public interest reporting. Can we take good ideas like...
            distributed knowledge, social networks, collaborative editing,
            the wisdom of crowds, citizen journalism, pro-am reporting...
            and put them to work to break news?"[337]Read more
            [338]Introducing NewAssignment.Net:
            "Enterprise reporting goes pro-am. Assignments are open
            sourced. They begin online. Reporters working with smart users
            and blogging editors get the story the pack wouldn't, couldn't
            or didn't."[339]Read more [340]What I Learned from Assignment
            Zero
            "Here are my coordinates for the territory we need to be
            searching. I got them from doing a distributed trend story
            with Wired.com and thinking through the results."
             [341]Read more [342]If Bloggers Had No Ethics Blogging Would
            Have Failed, But it Didn't. So Let's Get a Clue:
            "Those in journalism who want to bring ethics to blogging
            ought to start with why people trust (some) bloggers, not with
            an ethics template made for a prior platform operating as a
            closed system in a one-to-many world."[343]Read more [344]The
            View From Nowhere:
            "Occupy the reasonable middle between two markers for `vocal
            critic,' and critics look ridiculous charging you with bias.
            Their symmetrical existence feels like proof of an underlying
            hysteria. Their mutually incompatible charges seem to cancel
            each other out. The minute evidence they marshall even shows a
            touch of fanaticism."
             [345]Read more [346]Rollback:
            "This White House doesn't settle for managing the news-what
            used to be called `feeding the beast'-because there is a
            larger aim: to roll back the press as a player within the
            executive branch, to make it less important in running the
            White House and governing the country."[347]Read more
            [348]Retreat from Empiricism: On Ron Suskind's Scoop:
            ""Realist, a classic term in foreign policy debates, and
            reality-based, which is not a classic term but more of an
            instant classic, are different ideas. We shouldn't fuzz them
            up. The press is capable of doing that because it never came
            to terms with what Suskind reported in 2004."
             [349]Read more [350]Karl Rove and the Religion of the
            Washington Press:
            "Savviness-that quality of being shrewd, practical,
            well-informed, perceptive, ironic, `with it,' and
            unsentimental in all things political-is, in a sense, their
            professional religion. They make a cult of it. And it was this
            cult that Karl Rove understood and exploited for political
            gain."
             [351]Read more [352]Journalism Is Itself a Religion:
            "We're headed, I think, for schism, tumult and divide as the
            religion of the American press meets the upheavals in global
            politics and public media that are well underway. Changing
            around us are the terms on which authority can be established
            by journalists. The Net is opening things up, shifting the
            power to publish around. Consumers are becoming producers,
            readers can be writers."[353]Read more [354]News Turns from a
            Lecture to a Conversation:
            "Some of the pressure the blogs are putting on journalists
            shows up, then, in the demand for "news as conversation," more
            of a back-and-forth, less of a pronouncement. This is an idea
            with long roots in academic journalism that suddenly (as in
            this year) jumped the track to become part of the news
            industry's internal dialogue."
             [355]Read more [356]Laying the Newspaper Gently Down to Die:
            "An industry that won't move until it is certain of days as
            good as its golden past is effectively dead, from a strategic
            point of view. Besides, there is an alternative if you don't
            have the faith or will or courage needed to accept reality and
            deal. The alternative is to drive the property to a profitable
            demise."
             [357]Read more [358]Grokking Woodward:
            "Woodward and Bernstein of 1972-74 didn't have such access,
            and this probably influenced-for the better-their view of what
            Nixon and his men were capable of. Watergate wasn't broken by
            reporters who had entree to the inner corridors of power. It
            was two guys on the Metro Desk."[359]Read more [360]Maybe
            Media Bias Has Become a Dumb Debate:
            "This here is a post for practically everyone in the game of
            seizing on media bias and denouncing it, which is part of our
            popular culture, and of course a loud part of our politics.
            And this is especially for the `we're fair and balanced,
            you're not' crowd, wherever I may have located you."[361]Read
            more [362]Bill O'Reilly and the Paranoid Style in News:
            "O'Reilly feeds off his own resentments-the establishment
            sneering at Inside Edition-and like Howard Beale, the `mad
            prophet of the airwaves,' his resentments are enlarged by the
            medium into public grievances among a mass of Americans
            unfairly denied voice."
             [363]Read more [364]Thoughts on the Killing of a Young
            Correspondent:
            "Among foreign correspondents, there is a phrase: `parachuting
            in.' That's when a reporter drops into foreign territory
            during an emergency, without much preparation, staying only as
            long as the story remains big. The high profile people who
            might parachute in are called Bigfoots in the jargon of
            network news. The problem with being a Bigfoot, of course, is
            that it's hard to walk in other people's shoes."[365]Read more
            [366]The Abyss of Observation Alone.
            "There are hidden moral hazards in the ethic of neutral
            observation and the belief in a professional `role' that
            transcends other loyalties. I think there is an abyss to
            observation alone. And I feel it has something to do with why
            more people don't trust journalists. They don't trust that
            abyss."
             [367]Read more [368]"Find Some New Information and Put it
            Into Your Post." Standards for Pro-Am Journalism at OffTheBus:
            "Opinion based on information `everyone' has is less valuable
            than opinion journalism based on information that you dug up,
            originated, or pieced together. So it's not important to us
            that contributors keep opinion out. What's important is that
            they put new information in. [369]Read more [370]Some Bloggers
            Meet the Bosses From Big Media:
            "What capacity for product development do news organizations
            show? Zip. How are they on nurturing innovation? Terrible. Is
            there an entreprenurial spirit in newsrooms? No. Do smart
            young people ever come in and overturn everything? Never."
             [371]Read more [372]The Weblog: An Extremely Democratic Form
            in Journalism
            "It's pirate radio, legalized; it's public access coming
            closer to life. Inside the borders of Blogistan (a real place
            with all the problems of a real place) we're closer to a
            vision of `producer democracy' than we are to any of the
            consumerist views that long ago took hold in the mass media,
            including much of the journalism presented on that platform."
             [373]Read more [374]No One Owns Journalism:
            "And Big Media doesn't entirely own the press, because if it
            did then the First Amendment, which mentions the press, would
            belong to Big Media. And it doesn't. These things were always
            true. The weblog doesn't change them. It just opens up an
            outlet to the sea. Which in turn extends `the press' to the
            desk in the bedroom of the suburban mom, where she blogs at
            night."[375]Read more [376]Horse Race Now! Horse Race
            Tomorrow! Horse Race Forever!:
            "How is it you know you're the press? Because you have a pass
            that says PRESS, and people open the gate. The locker room
            doors admit you. The story must be inside that gate; that's
            why they give us credentials. We get closer. We tell the fans
            what's going on. And if this was your logic, Bill James tried
            to bust it. Fellahs, said he to the baseball press, you have
            to realize that youare the gate."
             [377]Read more [378]Psst.... The Press is a Player:
            "The answer, I think, involves an open secret in political
            journalism that has been recognized for at least 20 years. But
            it is never dealt with, probably because the costs of facing
            it head on seem larger than the light tax on honesty any open
            secret demands. The secret is this: pssst... the press is a
            player in the campaign. And even though it knows this, as
            everyone knows it, the professional code of the journalist
            contains no instructions in what the press could or should be
            playing for?"
             [379]Read more [380]Die, Strategy News:
            "I think it's a bankrupt form. It serves no clear purpose, has
            no sensible rationale. The journalists who offer us strategy
            news do not know what public service they are providing, why
            they are providing it, for whom it is intended, or how we are
            supposed to use this strange variety of news."[381]Read more
            [382]He Said, She Said, We Said:
            "When journalists avoid drawing open conclusions, they are
            more vulnerable to charges of covert bias, of having a
            concealed agenda, of not being up front about their
            perspective, of unfairly building a case (for, against) while
            pretending only to report `what happened.'"
             [383]Read more [384]If Religion Writers Rode the Campaign
            Bus:
            "Maybe irony, backstage peaking and "de-mystify the process"
            only get you so far, and past that point they explain nothing.
            Puzzling through the convention story, because I'm heading
            right into it myself, made me to realize that journalism's
            contempt for ritual was deeply involved here. Ritual is
            newsless; therefore it must be meaningless. But is that really
            true?."[385]Read more [386]Philip Gourevitch: Campaign
            Reporting as Foreign Beat:
            "`A presidential election is a like a gigantic moving
            television show,' he said. It is the extreme opposite of an
            overlooked event. The show takes place inside a bubble, which
            is a security perimeter overseen by the Secret Service. If you
            go outside the bubble for any reason, you become a security
            risk until you are screened again by hand."[387]Read more
            [388]What Time is it in Political Journalism?
            "Adam Gopnik argued ten years ago that the press did not know
            who it was within politics, or what it stood for. There was a
            vacuum in journalism where political argument and imagination
            should be. Now there are signs that this absence of thought is
            ending."
             [389]Read more [390]Off the Grid Journalism:
            "The assignment was straightforward enough," writes Marjie
            Lundstrom of the Sacramento Bee, "talk to people." When a
            writer dissents from it or departs from it, the master
            narrative is a very real thing. Here are two examples: one
            from politics, one from music.[391]Read more
     * Archives
          +
          + [392]October 2013
          + [393]August 2013
          + [394]July 2013
          + [395]June 2013
          + [396]May 2013
          + [397]February 2013
          + [398]January 2013
          + [399]October 2012
          + [400]September 2012
          + [401]August 2012
          + [402]July 2012
          + [403]June 2012
          + [404]April 2012
          + [405]March 2012
          + [406]February 2012
          + [407]January 2012
          + [408]December 2011
          + [409]November 2011
          + [410]October 2011
          + [411]September 2011
          + [412]August 2011
          + [413]July 2011
          + [414]June 2011
          + [415]April 2011
          + [416]March 2011
          + [417]February 2011
          + [418]December 2010
          + [419]November 2010
          + [420]October 2010
          + [421]September 2010
          + [422]August 2010
          + [423]July 2010
          + [424]June 2010
          + [425]March 2010
          + [426]February 2010
          + [427]April 2009
          + [428]March 2009
          + [429]February 2009
          + [430]January 2009
          + [431]December 2008
          + [432]September 2008
          + [433]August 2008
          + [434]July 2008
          + [435]June 2008
          + [436]May 2008
          + [437]April 2008
          + [438]March 2008
          + [439]February 2008
          + [440]January 2008
          + [441]December 2007
          + [442]November 2007
          + [443]October 2007
          + [444]September 2007
          + [445]August 2007
          + [446]July 2007
          + [447]June 2007
          + [448]May 2007
          + [449]March 2007
          + [450]January 2007
          + [451]December 2006
          + [452]November 2006
          + [453]October 2006
          + [454]September 2006
          + [455]August 2006
          + [456]July 2006
          + [457]June 2006
          + [458]May 2006
          + [459]April 2006
          + [460]March 2006
          + [461]February 2006
          + [462]January 2006
          + [463]December 2005
          + [464]November 2005
          + [465]October 2005
          + [466]September 2005
          + [467]August 2005
          + [468]July 2005
          + [469]June 2005
          + [470]May 2005
          + [471]April 2005
          + [472]March 2005
          + [473]February 2005
          + [474]January 2005
          + [475]December 2004
          + [476]November 2004
          + [477]October 2004
          + [478]September 2004
          + [479]August 2004
          + [480]July 2004
          + [481]June 2004
          + [482]May 2004
          + [483]April 2004
          + [484]March 2004
          + [485]February 2004
          + [486]January 2004
          + [487]December 2003
          + [488]November 2003
          + [489]October 2003
          + [490]September 2003
          + [491]August 2003

   [492]Pressthink is powered by [493]Wordpress and the [494]Simple Times
   Theme which is provided by the [495]Arthur L. Carter Journalism
   Institute at [496]New York University as a public service.

References

   1. http://pressthink.org/feed/
   2. http://pressthink.org/feed/
   3. http://pressthink.org/comments/feed/
   4. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/feed/
   5. http://pressthink.org/2013/07/the-rise-of-the-personal-franchise-site-in-news/
   6. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/edward-snowden-meet-jeff-bezos/
   7. http://pressthink.org/
   8. http://pressthink.org/
   9. http://pressthink.org/about/
  10. http://pressthink.org/bio/
  11. http://pressthink.org/faq/
  12. http://pressthink.org/recomended/
  13. http://pressthink.org/talks/
  14. http://www.mediaite.com/tv/greenwald-and-nyts-james-risen-completely-deflate-jeffrey-toobins-tortured-logic-on-nsa-snowden/
  15. http://www.youtube.com/embed/d53QM8tnQUQ
  16. http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/06/nsa-phone-records-verizon-court-order
  17. http://pressthink.org/2013/07/the-snowden-effect-definition-and-examples/
  18. http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/29/us/politics/momentum-builds-against-nsa-surveillance.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0
  19. http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/war_stories/2013/08/national_security_agency_s_surveillance_scandal_how_the_nsa_can_regain_americans.single.html
  20. http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/for-nsa-chief-terrorist-threat-drives-passion-to-collect-it-all/2013/07/14/3d26ef80-ea49-11e2-a301-ea5a8116d211_print.html
  21. http://www.businessinsider.com/senator-there-are-two-patriot-acts-and-you-dont-know-about-one-of-them-2011-10
  22. http://www.people-press.org/2013/07/26/government-surveillance-a-question-wording-experiment/
  23. http://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2013/08/restoring_trust.html
  24. http://www.economist.com/blogs/democracyinamerica/2013/07/secret-government
  25. http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/the-white-house-should-end-the-bulk-collection-of-americans-phone-records/2013/07/26/c3c0103e-f553-11e2-9434-60440856fadf_print.html
  26. http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887323309404578617463152440542.html
  27. http://tv.msnbc.com/2013/07/31/congress-told-of-extent-of-nsa-surveillance-program-years-ago/
  28. http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2013/08/1/breach_or_debate_congress_snowden_prism%20?page=full
  29. http://pressthink.org/2013/07/the-snowden-effect-definition-and-examples/#p19
  30. http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/print/2013/08/how-secrecy-has-already-corroded-our-democracy-in-concrete-ways/278478/
  31. http://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2013/08/restoring_trust.html
  32. http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2013/08/if-bruce-schneier-ran-the-nsa-hed-ask-a-basic-question-does-it-do-any-good/
  33. http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2013/08/01/declaring_an_end_to_the_decade_of_fear?page=0,0&page=full
  34. http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/eugene-robinson-snowden-performed-a-valuable-service/2013/07/29/b232965a-f866-11e2-8e84-c56731a202fb_print.html
  35. http://www.lawfareblog.com/2013/08/reflections-on-nsa-oversight-and-a-prediction-that-nsa-authorities-and-oversight-and-transparency-will-expand/
  36. https://www.techdirt.com/articles/20130810/09240524136/jennifer-hoelzers-insiders-view-administrations-response-to-nsa-surveillance-leaks.shtml
  37. http://reason.com/blog/2013/07/24/white-house-totally-ready-to-have-that-c
  38. http://thinkprogress.org/security/2013/08/06/2423191/surveillance-democracy-nsa/
  39. http://stearns.wordpress.com/2013/08/09/informed-public/
  40. http://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2013/jun/09/nsa-whistleblower-edward-snowden-interview-video
  41. http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/comment/2013/06/edward-snowden-nsa-leaker-is-no-hero.html?currentPage=all
  42. http://twitter.com/share
  43. http://www.facebook.com/plugins/like.php?href=http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/&layout=button_count&show_faces=false&width=450&action=recommend&colorscheme=light&height=21
  44. http://pressthink.org/category/uncategorized/
  45. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/feed/
  46. http://www.danablankenhorn.com/
  47. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66401
  48. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66501
  49. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66504
  50. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66842
  51. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67119
  52. http://carberrylaw.com/
  53. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66511
  54. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66713
  55. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66843
  56. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66858
  57. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
  58. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66404
  59. http://tyndallreport.com/
  60. %E2%80%9Chttps://medium.com/geek-empire-1/a1ebd2b4a0e5%E2%80%9D
  61. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66686
  62. http://stearns.wordpress.com/
  63. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66809
  64. http://www.pbs.org/mediashift/2012/11/we-need-a-truth-campaign-for-digital-literacy-and-data-tracking318
  65. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66407
  66. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66503
  67. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66652
  68. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66846
  69. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66408
  70. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66409
  71. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66411
  72. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66847
  73. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-70133
  74. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Presidential_Medal_of_Freedom
  75. http://www.reddit.com/r/obsequious_thumbtack
  76. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66413
  77. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66460
  78. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66619
  79. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66848
  80. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-68730
  81. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
  82. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66415
  83. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66462
  84. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66849
  85. http://notesonatheory.wordpress.com/
  86. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66482
  87. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66510
  88. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66634
  89. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66630
  90. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66412
  91. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66472
  92. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66478
  93. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66463
  94. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66466
  95. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
  96. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66481
  97. http://www.themisfortuneteller.com/
  98. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66576
  99. http://notesonatheory.wordpress.com/
 100. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66483
 101. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66687
 102. http://thingumbobesquire.blogspot.com/
 103. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66473
 104. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-68060
 105. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66474
 106. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66502
 107. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66636
 108. http://www.magellanmediapartners.com/
 109. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66479
 110. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 111. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66484
 112. http://www.emptywheel.net/2013/08/06/was-it-nsa-or-a-yemeni-ally-leaking-the-clear-orders-from-zawahiri-to-wuhayshi/
 113. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66642
 114. http://www.themisfortuneteller.com/
 115. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66697
 116. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66488
 117. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 118. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66490
 119. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66491
 120. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66500
 121. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 122. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66494
 123. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66497
 124. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 125. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66499
 126. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66523
 127. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66593
 128. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66574
 129. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 130. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66580
 131. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66602
 132. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 133. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66650
 134. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66679
 135. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 136. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66693
 137. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66730
 138. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 139. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66731
 140. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66791
 141. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66627
 142. http://www.themisfortuneteller.com/
 143. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66700
 144. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66705
 145. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66707
 146. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67533
 147. http://www.hughsansom.com/
 148. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66489
 149. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66522
 150. http://www.themisfortuneteller.com/
 151. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66702
 152. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66492
 153. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 154. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66493
 155. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66746
 156. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66505
 157. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66506
 158. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 159. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66509
 160. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66512
 161. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 162. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66518
 163. http://goo.gl/ommbdS
 164. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66738
 165. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66515
 166. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66525
 167. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 168. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66530
 169. http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2013/08/1/breach_or_debate_congress_snowden_prism%20?page=full
 170. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66638
 171. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66684
 172. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66531
 173. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66566
 174. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67535
 175. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66538
 176. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66567
 177. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66541
 178. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66543
 179. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66547
 180. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 181. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66549
 182. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66550
 183. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66555
 184. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66565
 185. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66626
 186. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66631
 187. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66640
 188. http://toldyousotoldyouso.wordpress.com/2013/08/08/the-toobin-principle-pressthink/
 189. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66683
 190. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66685
 191. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 192. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66694
 193. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66749
 194. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66805
 195. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66808
 196. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 197. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66811
 198. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66815
 199. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 200. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66818
 201. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66868
 202. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 203. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66896
 204. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66949
 205. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67066
 206. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67515
 207. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67679
 208. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67686
 209. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 210. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67697
 211. http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/09/edward-snowden-nsa-whistleblower-surveillance
 212. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-68478
 213. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-68732
 214. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-68740
 215. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-68933
 216. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-68955
 217. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-70492
 218. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66699
 219. http://www.themisfortuneteller.com/
 220. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66703
 221. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66800
 222. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66813
 223. http://lawrenceserewicz.wordpress.com/
 224. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-66823
 225. https://www.law.upenn.edu/institutes/cerl/conferences/ethicsofsecrecy/papers/reading/Pozen.pdf
 226. http://blogs.fas.org/secrecy/
 227. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67526
 228. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67528
 229. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67075
 230. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 231. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67089
 232. http://pressthink.org/2013/07/the-snowden-effect-definition-and-examples/
 233. http://www.nationaljournal.com/nationalsecurity/why-edward-snowden-s-motives-matter-20130624
 234. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67134
 235. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67451
 236. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67194
 237. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67223
 238. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67463
 239. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67519
 240. http://lawrenceserewicz.wordpress.com/
 241. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67279
 242. http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/intel/m010506.pdf
 243. http://bit.ly/1eEuyf7
 244. http://blogs.fas.org/secrecy/?s=fisa&submit_x=-957&submit_y=-81&post_type=post&paged=10
 245. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 246. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67289
 247. http://lawrenceserewicz.wordpress.com/
 248. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67312
 249. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NSA_warrantless_surveillance_%282001%E2%80%9307%29
 250. http://lawrenceserewicz.wordpress.com/2013/07/17/why-we-have-surveillance/
 251. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67511
 252. http://lawrenceserewicz.wordpress.com/
 253. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67617
 254. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 255. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67628
 256. http://online.barrons.com/article/SB122973324821923181.html
 257. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/12/04/us/politics/04emanuel.html?pagewanted=all
 258. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-68476
 259. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67462
 260. http://bfm.radio.fr/
 261. http://lawrenceserewicz.wordpress.com/
 262. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67281
 263. http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/intel/RL34600.pdf
 264. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-67488
 265. http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/12/intelligence-committee-nsa-vote-justin-amash
 266. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-68554
 267. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-68743
 268. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-68967
 269. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-68986
 270. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-69116
 271. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-69120
 272. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-69703
 273. http://www.canceropole-idf.fr/sites/default/files/manifestations/sem2013-kpole-colloque/sem2013-kpole-colloque-12-kupiec.pdf
 274. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-68851
 275. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-68886
 276. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-68936
 277. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-68961
 278. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-70657
 279. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-68970
 280. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-69722
 281. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/#comment-70262
 282. http://pressthink.org/2013/07/the-rise-of-the-personal-franchise-site-in-news/
 283. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/edward-snowden-meet-jeff-bezos/
 284. http://pressthink.org/about/
 285. mailto:jr3atnyudotedu
 286. https://plus.google.com/u/0/106506966828595242496?rel=author
 287. https://twitter.com/jayrosen_nyu
 288. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 289. http://jay.40twits.com/
 290. http://rebootnews.com/
 291. http://jayrosen.posterous.com/
 292. http://pressthink.org/rss/
 293. http://studio20nyu.tumblr.com/
 294. http://pressthink.org/faq/
 295. http://pressthink.org/2013/10/the-bbcs-16-questions-to-glenn-greenwald/
 296. http://pressthink.org/2013/10/the-production-of-innocence-in-the-reporting-of-american-politics-a-pressthink-analysis/
 297. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/pressthink-is-ten-years-old-to-celebrate-im-asking-its-readers-to-de-lurk-wanna-play/
 298. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/to-make-journalism-harder-slower-less-secure/
 299. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/conspiracy-to-commit-journalism/
 300. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/when-youre-in-a-fourth-estate-situation/
 301. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/edward-snowden-meet-jeff-bezos/
 302. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/the-toobin-principle/
 303. http://pressthink.org/2013/07/the-rise-of-the-personal-franchise-site-in-news/
 304. http://pressthink.org/2013/07/criticizing-cnn-goodbye-to-that/
 305. http://pressthink.org/2013/07/the-snowden-effect-definition-and-examples/
 306. http://pressthink.org/2013/06/a-few-principles-for-how-i-operate-as-a-critic/
 307. http://pressthink.org/2013/06/david-gregory-tries-to-read-glenn-greenwald-and-the-guardian-out-of-the-journalism-club/
 308. http://pressthink.org/2013/06/no-candy-crowley-that-is-not-good-enough/
 309. http://pressthink.org/2013/06/politics-some-politics-none-two-ways-to-excel-in-political-journalism-neither-dominates/
 310. http://pressthink.org/2009/01/audience-atomization-overcome-why-the-internet-weakens-the-authority-of-the-press/
 311. http://pressthink.org/2009/01/audience-atomization-overcome-why-the-internet-weakens-the-authority-of-the-press/
 312. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/06/27/ppl_frmr.html
 313. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/06/27/ppl_frmr.html
 314. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/06/26/pdf.html
 315. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/06/26/pdf.html
 316. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/01/21/berk_essy.html
 317. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/01/21/berk_essy.html
 318. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/04/22/business_model.html
 319. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/04/22/business_model.html
 320. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/08/13/national_explain.html
 321. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/08/13/national_explain.html
 322. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/01/20/the_campaign_pr.html
 323. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/01/20/the_campaign_pr.html
 324. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/03/09/libby_fdl.html
 325. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/03/09/libby_fdl.html
 326. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/06/04/currmudgeon_nh.html
 327. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/06/04/currmudgeon_nh.html
 328. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/03/14/pincus_neutrality.html
 329. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/03/14/pincus_neutrality.html
 330. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/07/14/a_most_useful_d.html
 331. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/07/14/a_most_useful_d.html
 332. http://archive.pressthink.org/2003/09/08/basics_master.html
 333. http://archive.pressthink.org/2003/09/08/basics_master.html
 334. http://archive.pressthink.org/2009/04/12/hesaid_shesaid.html
 335. http://archive.pressthink.org/2009/04/12/hesaid_shesaid.html
 336. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/06/22/blgrc_iv.html
 337. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/06/22/blgrc_iv.html
 338. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/07/25/nadn_qa.html
 339. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/07/25/nadn_qa.html
 340. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/09/18/because_we_have.html
 341. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/10/09/what_i_learned.html
 342. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/09/18/because_we_have.html
 343. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/09/18/because_we_have.html
 344. http://archive.pressthink.org/2003/09/18/jennings.html
 345. http://archive.pressthink.org/2003/09/18/jennings.html
 346. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/07/16/rll_back.html
 347. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/07/16/rll_back.html
 348. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/12/18/suskind_empiricism.html
 349. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/12/18/suskind_empiricism.html
 350. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/08/14/rove_and_press.html
 351. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/08/14/rove_and_press.html
 352. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/01/07/press_religion.html#morel
 353. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/01/07/press_religion.html#morel
 354. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/12/29/tp04_lctr.html
 355. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/12/29/tp04_lctr.html
 356. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/03/29/nwsp_dwn.html
 357. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/03/29/nwsp_dwn.html
 358. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/12/09/wdwd_grk.html
 359. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/12/09/wdwd_grk.html
 360. http://archive.pressthink.org/2003/10/24/bias_questions.html
 361. http://archive.pressthink.org/2003/10/24/bias_questions.html
 362. http://archive.pressthink.org/2003/10/21/oreilly_voice.html
 363. http://archive.pressthink.org/2003/10/21/oreilly_voice.html
 364. http://archive.pressthink.org/2003/12/24/sander_speech.html
 365. http://archive.pressthink.org/2003/12/24/sander_speech.html
 366. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/03/01/svd_kpln.html
 367. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/03/01/svd_kpln.html
 368. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/07/31/newinf_bus.html
 369. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/07/31/newinf_bus.html
 370. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/09/29/msm_blgr.html
 371. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/09/29/msm_blgr.html
 372. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/03/08/weblog_demos.html
 373. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/03/08/weblog_demos.html
 374. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/03/25/con_prep.html
 375. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/03/25/con_prep.html
 376. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/01/03/inside_baseball.html
 377. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/01/03/inside_baseball.html
 378. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/01/23/press_player.html
 379. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/01/23/press_player.html
 380. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/03/20/die_strategy.html
 381. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/03/20/die_strategy.html
 382. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/06/04/ruten_milbank.html
 383. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/06/04/ruten_milbank.html
 384. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/07/16/revealer_forum.html
 385. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/07/16/revealer_forum.html
 386. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/09/22/gour_talk.html
 387. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/09/22/gour_talk.html
 388. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/02/23/gopnik_time.html
 389. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/02/23/gopnik_time.html
 390. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/02/29/off_grid.html
 391. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/02/29/off_grid.html
 392. http://pressthink.org/2013/10/
 393. http://pressthink.org/2013/08/
 394. http://pressthink.org/2013/07/
 395. http://pressthink.org/2013/06/
 396. http://pressthink.org/2013/05/
 397. http://pressthink.org/2013/02/
 398. http://pressthink.org/2013/01/
 399. http://pressthink.org/2012/10/
 400. http://pressthink.org/2012/09/
 401. http://pressthink.org/2012/08/
 402. http://pressthink.org/2012/07/
 403. http://pressthink.org/2012/06/
 404. http://pressthink.org/2012/04/
 405. http://pressthink.org/2012/03/
 406. http://pressthink.org/2012/02/
 407. http://pressthink.org/2012/01/
 408. http://pressthink.org/2011/12/
 409. http://pressthink.org/2011/11/
 410. http://pressthink.org/2011/10/
 411. http://pressthink.org/2011/09/
 412. http://pressthink.org/2011/08/
 413. http://pressthink.org/2011/07/
 414. http://pressthink.org/2011/06/
 415. http://pressthink.org/2011/04/
 416. http://pressthink.org/2011/03/
 417. http://pressthink.org/2011/02/
 418. http://pressthink.org/2010/12/
 419. http://pressthink.org/2010/11/
 420. http://pressthink.org/2010/10/
 421. http://pressthink.org/2010/09/
 422. http://pressthink.org/2010/08/
 423. http://pressthink.org/2010/07/
 424. http://pressthink.org/2010/06/
 425. http://pressthink.org/2010/03/
 426. http://pressthink.org/2010/02/
 427. http://pressthink.org/2009/04/
 428. http://pressthink.org/2009/03/
 429. http://pressthink.org/2009/02/
 430. http://pressthink.org/2009/01/
 431. http://pressthink.org/2008/12/
 432. http://pressthink.org/2008/09/
 433. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/08/
 434. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/07/
 435. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/06/
 436. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/05/
 437. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/04/
 438. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/03/
 439. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/02/
 440. http://archive.pressthink.org/2008/01/
 441. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/12/
 442. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/11/
 443. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/10/
 444. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/09/
 445. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/08/
 446. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/07/
 447. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/06/
 448. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/05/
 449. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/03/
 450. http://archive.pressthink.org/2007/01/
 451. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/12/
 452. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/11/
 453. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/10/
 454. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/09/
 455. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/08/
 456. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/07/
 457. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/06/
 458. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/05/
 459. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/04/
 460. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/03/
 461. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/02/
 462. http://archive.pressthink.org/2006/01/
 463. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/12/
 464. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/11/
 465. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/10/
 466. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/09/
 467. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/08/
 468. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/07/
 469. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/06/
 470. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/05/
 471. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/04/
 472. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/03/
 473. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/02/
 474. http://archive.pressthink.org/2005/01/
 475. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/12/
 476. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/11/
 477. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/10/
 478. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/09/
 479. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/08/
 480. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/07/
 481. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/06/
 482. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/05/
 483. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/04/
 484. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/03/
 485. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/02/
 486. http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/01/
 487. http://archive.pressthink.org/2003/12/
 488. http://archive.pressthink.org/2003/11/
 489. http://archive.pressthink.org/2003/10/
 490. http://archive.pressthink.org/2003/09/
 491. http://archive.pressthink.org/2003/08/
 492. http://pressthink.org/
 493. http://wordpress.org/
 494. http://journalism.nyu.edu/publishing/simple-times
 495. http://journalism.nyu.edu/
 496. http://nyu.edu/
