   #[1]My Biased Coin - Atom [2]My Biased Coin - RSS [3]My Biased Coin -
   Atom

   [4]skip to main | [5]skip to sidebar

[6]My Biased Coin

   My take on computer science --
   algorithms, networking, information theory --
   and related items.

Wednesday, February 27, 2013

Discussing STOC 2013 PC with Joan Feigenbaum

   Joan Feigenbaum is the Program Committee Chair for STOC 2013, where
   papers decisions were recently announced;  I served as part of the
   Executive Committee.  Joan did an excellent job running the entire
   process, and experimented with a "two-tiered" PC.  We agreed that it
   would be interesting to talk about her experience on the blog, and she
   agreed to answer some questions I posed.  We hope you'll find the
   discussion interesting.
   1.  You're now completing your stint as Program Committee Chair for
   STOC 2013.  How do you think the program looks?
   I think it looks great.  We had roughly 20% more submissions than last
   year, and many of them were excellent -- an embarrassment of riches.
   Once we decided to stick with the recent STOC practice of a three-day
   program with two parallel tracks of talks, we were faced with the usual
   problem for STOC PCs, namely having to reject many clearly acceptable
   submissions.  I guess that's a much better problem to have than an
   insufficient number of clearly acceptable submissions, but I still have
   reservations about this approach to conferences.  (There's more on that
   in my answer to questions 2 and 5 below.)
   2. You tried a number of new things this year -- a "two-tiered" PC
   being the most notable.  How do you think it worked?  Where do you
   think it improved things, and where did it not work as you might have
   hoped?
   When Lance Fortnow, SIGACT Past Chair, asked me to be the Program Chair
   for STOC 2013, he strongly encouraged me to "experiment" and, in
   particular, strongly encouraged me to try a two-tiered PC.  I agreed to
   do so, but it was a strange "experiment" in that it was not clear to me
   (or to anyone, for that matter) what problem a two-tiered PC might
   solve.  There was no hypothesis to test, and the whole exercise wasn't
   a controlled experiment in any well defined sense.  Nonetheless, I was
   able to reverse engineer my way into some potential advantages of a
   two-tiered PC and hence some good reasons for trying it.
         Before I get into those reasons, however, I should state the
   primary conclusion that I drew from this experience: Given the
   extraordinarily high quantity and quality of STOC submissions, it's
   extremely easy to put together a good program, and any reasonable PC
   structure will do.  That is, assuming that you don't want to change the
   nature of the product (where the product is a three-day, two-track STOC
   that has a fairly but not ridiculously low acceptance rate), you have a
   lot of latitude in the program-committee process that you use to
   produce it.  There's nothing sacred about the "traditional," 20-person
   PC with one chair and no PC-authored submissions; there's nothing
   definitively wrong with it either.
         Now what did we try this year, and what were some of its
   potential advantages?  First of all, we briefly considered changing the
   product, e.g., by having three parallel sessions, but decided against
   it; we set out to put together a STOC program that was similar in
   quality and quantity to other recent STOC programs but to do so using a
   different process.  We had an Executive Committee (EC) of nine people
   (including me) and a Program Committee (PC) of 62 people.  PC members
   were allowed to submit, but EC members were not.  The job of the PC was
   to read the submissions in detail and write reviews, and the job of the
   EC was to oversee and coordinate the reviewing process.  For example,
   EC members reassigned submissions that HotCRP had assigned to
   inappropriate reviewers, looked for submissions that required extra
   scrutiny because they might have subtle technical flaws, and, most
   importantly, looked for pairs of submissions that were directly
   comparable and needed to have at least one reviewer in common.  In
   order to promote high-quality reviews (which I thought should be
   attainable, because each PC member had fewer submissions to review than
   he would have in a traditional PC), I put together a list of suggested
   review questions and regularly reminded PC members to flesh out,
   revise, and polish their reviews based on committee discussions.  We
   made accept/reject decisions about a hefty fraction of the submissions
   fairly early in the process, based on two reviews of each submission.
   For the rest of the submissions, we got additional reviews or asked the
   original two reviewers to consider them in more detail or both; for
   each set of comparable submissions that survived the first cut, an EC
   member conducted an online "meeting" (using both email and HotCRP
   comments) of all of the reviewers of submissions in the set.
         One potential big advantage of this way of doing things over the
   traditional way is that PC service can be much less burdensome.  Each
   PC member can review far fewer submissions than he would for a
   traditional program committee and can also submit his own papers.  He
   can devote considerably more time and attention to each submission
   assigned to him and still wind up spending considerably less total time
   and effort than he would under the old system.  He's also less likely
   to have to review submissions that are outside of his area(s) of
   expertise, because there are many more PC members to choose from when
   finalizing assignments.  The hope is that almost everyone in the theory
   community will be willing to serve on a STOC PC when asked if the
   workload is manageable, that PC members will be more satisfied with the
   quality of their work if they can spend more time on each submission
   and don't have to review submissions outside of their area(s), and that
   authors will get higher quality reviews.
        A second potential advantage is that the managerial and oversight
   responsibilities can be shared by the entire EC and don't all fall on
   the chair.  In almost every traditional program committee I've served
   on (not just STOC committees), there has been a great deal of
   last-minute scrambling.  In particular, I've been in many face-to-face
   program-committee meetings at which we discovered that various pairs of
   papers needed to be compared but had been read by disjoint sets of
   reviewers.  That's not surprising, of course, when everyone (except the
   chair) had spent the previous few months trying to read the 60
   submissions assigned to him and hence hadn't had a minute in which to
   at least skim all of the other submissions.  These relationships among
   submissions can be discovered early in the process if there are enough
   people whose job it is to look for them.  Having an EC that can
   facilitate many parallel, online "meetings" about disjoint sets of
   gray-area submissions is also a big win over a monolithic face-to-face
   program-committee meeting.  The latter inevitably requires each PC
   member to sit through long, tense discussions of submissions that he
   hasn't read and isn't interested in; our procedure enabled everyone to
   participate in the discussions to which he could really make a
   contribution -- and only those.
        I think that most of these hoped-for improvements actually
   materialized.  Certainly almost everyone whom I invited to serve on the
   PC said yes, and many said explicitly "OK, I'll do it because the
   workload looks as though it won't be crushing," or "I really appreciate
   the opportunity to submit papers!"  Similarly, we had no last-minute
   scrambling, and I attribute that to the oversight work done by the EC.
    All of the potential technical flaws in submissions that we discovered
   were discovered early in the process and resolved one way or the other
   (sometimes with the help of outside experts); similarly, all of the
   pairs of submissions that, by the end, we thought should be compared
   were assigned to common reviewers early in the process.
         Unfortunately, the effect of the lower workload on quality of
   reviews was disappointing.  There was some improvement over the reviews
   produced by traditional STOC PCs but not as much as I had hoped for.
   3. In my experience, our major PCs -- STOC and FOCS -- have small
   amounts of institutional memory and even smaller amounts of actual
   analysis of performance.  What data would you like to have to help
   evaluate whether the PC process went better this year?
   For this year, I'd like to hear from PC members whether they did in
   fact spend less time overall but more time per submission than they
   have in the past on "traditional" PCs.  I'd also like to know whether
   they found the whole experience to be manageable and unstressful (if
   that's a word) enough to be willing to do it often, by which I mean
   significantly more often than they'd be willing to serve on traditional
   PCs.  Finally, I'd like to know whether the opportunity to submit
   papers was a factor in their willingness to serve and whether they
   found it awkward to review their fellow PC members' submissions.
         If future PC Chairs continue to experiment with the process or
   even with the product, as I suggest that they do in my answer to
   question 5 below, then I hope they'll capture their PC members'
   opinions of the experimental steps they take.
   4. Are there things you did for the PC that you would change if you had
   to do it again?
   Because the goals of this "experiment" were so amorphous, I and the
   rest of the EC members made up a great deal of the process as we went
   along.  If I were to run this committee process again, I would start by
   creating a detailed schedule, and I would distribute and explain it to
   the entire PC at the beginning of the review process.  I'd also
   lengthen the amount of time PC members had to write their first round
   of reviews (used to make the "first-cut" accept/reject decisions) by a
   week or two.  I'd also assign second-round reviewers at the beginning,
   rather than waiting as we did until after the first round of decisions
   had already been made; we wound up losing a fair amount of time while
   we figured out whom to ask for additional reviews, and I suspect that
   many PC members wound up losing interest during this down time.  So
   each submission would still receive just two reviews in the first
   round, but third (and perhaps fourth) reviewers would have their
   assignments and be ready to start immediately on all submissions on
   which early decisions weren't made.
   5. Are there things you would strongly recommend to future PC chairs?
   I hope that the theory community as a whole will consider fundamental
   changes to the form and function of STOC.  As I said in my answer to
   question 2, if we want to continue producing the same type of product
   (a three-day, two-track conference with an acceptance rate somewhere
   between 25% and 30%), then there are many PC processes that would work
   well enough; each PC chair might as well choose the process that he or
   she thinks will be easiest for all concerned.  The more interesting
   question is whether we want to change the product.  Do we want more
   parallel sessions, no parallel sessions, different numbers of parallel
   sessions on different days, more invited talks, more papers but the
   same number of talks (which could be achieved by having some papers
   presented only in poster sessions), or something even more radical?
   What do we want the goals of STOC to be, and how should we arrange the
   program to achieve our goals?
        The community should discuss these and other options.  We should
   elect SIGACT officers who support experimentation and empower future PC
   Chairs to try fundamentally new things.
         More specifically, I recommend that future PC chairs include, as
   we did, a subcommittee whose job it is to oversee the reviewing process
   rather than actually to review submissions; in our case, this oversight
   function was the responsibility of the executive "tier," but there
   might be other ways to do it.  As I said in my answer to question 2,
   giving oversight and management responsibility to more people than just
   the PC Chair really helped in uncovering problems early and in making
   sure that related submissions were compared early.
         Finally, I'd of course recommend that future PC chairs not make
   the same mistakes I made -- see my answer to question 4.
   6. In my experience, the theoretical computer science community is
   known for comparatively poor conference reviewing.  Having been PC
   chair, do you agree or disagree?  Do you think the two-tiered structure
   help make for better reviews? Do you have any thoughts on how to make
   reviewing better in the future?
   In my experience, reviews on submissions to theory conferences range
   enormously in quality.  The worst consist of just a few tossed-off
   remarks and the best of very clear, well thought out, constructive
   criticism.  As I said in my answer to question 2, I had hoped that the
   two-tiered PC and its concomitant lighter reviewing load (together with
   my suggested review questions and regular prodding) would lead to a
   marked improvement in the quality of reviews, but we got only a small
   improvement.  I was extremely disappointed.  Frankly, I don't know what
   the theory community can do about review quality.  Maybe we should
   start by discussing it frankly and finding out whether people really
   think it's a problem.  If most people don't see it as a serious
   problem, then perhaps we don't have to do anything.
   7. As you know, I'm a big fan of HotCRP.  How did you like it?
   I've used three web-based conference-management systems: HotCRP,
   EasyChair, and Shai Halevi's system (the name of which I don't
   remember).  In my experience, they're all reasonable and certainly
   capable of getting the job done, but none of them is great; HotCRP is
   the best, but not by a wide margin.  Part of my problem was that I had
   unrealistic expectations going in.  I'd been told that HotCRP was
   almost infinitely flexible and configurable, and I thought that it
   would be easy to set things up exactly as I wanted them; that turned
   out not to be true.  On the other hand, if you use HotCRP exactly as it
   was designed to be used, it works quite well.  I have the feeling that
   it is a "system builder's system" in that it's very powerful and very
   efficient but not all that easy on users; the UI is not great.  Anyway,
   you and I do agree on one thing: HotCRP's "tagging" feature is amazing;
   PCs of all shapes and sizes should make heavy use of it.
   Posted by [7]Michael Mitzenmacher at [8]9:20 AM

43 comments:

   Anonymous said...
          I have heard that the PC was encouraged to perform reviews
          themselves and not seek external reviewers. Is this accurate?
          I think such encouragement could be dangerous. For example, the
          few experts in the area might not be on the PC (or be, but have
          COIs), and the PC reviewers might then make mistakes. Indeed, I
          know at least one paper in this program whose results follow
          from previous work, and a scan of the PC, despite it being
          larger than normal, shows no experts in the relevant research
          area (any expert external reviewer would hopefully have seen
          this immediately).
          One issue is that it is hard to gather statistics about
          incidences like the above (one example does not amount to a
          trend), since people are generally hesitant about pointing out
          such papers and potentially creating bad relations with
          colleagues. However, I do think that there are some large
          benefits of not only having external reviewers, but strongly
          encouraging it, to ensure high-confidence and expert evaluations
          of submissions.

          [9]February 27, 2013 at 9:52 AM [10][icon_delete13.gif]

   Anonymous said...
          I found the reviews of my papers (either accepted or rejected)
          contained much more details than my previous STOC/FOCS
          submission reviews. While I may still disagree with some
          specific comments, I appreciate the dedicated effort of PC
          members, and in particular, the PC chair who did all the
          experiments in order to improve STOC/FOCS. (Somehow to my
          disappointment, the coming FOCS dates back to the one-tier PC
          system.)

          [11]February 27, 2013 at 10:42 AM [12][icon_delete13.gif]

   Anonymous said...
          One thing not addressed in this post is the submission format.
          We heard of quite a lot noise of it. One thing I don't
          understand is that why so many people complained that no one
          would read this double column toy. As far as I know, Science,
          Nature, PNAS, all use double column.
          Either simple or double column is okay for me. My point is
          simple: we should keep the submission format the same as
          proceedings format. If adopted simple column in the final
          proceedings one day, then peace.

          [13]February 27, 2013 at 10:50 AM [14][icon_delete13.gif]

   Anonymous said...
          I don't think we can change the problem of poor reviewing
          quality overnight. Receiving poor reviews for many years sets
          certain precedents and expectations in people's minds. When the
          same people write reviews, this is what they expect because
          these are the reviews that they have always seen!
          Improving reviewing quality will be a long process, and making
          life easier for PC members is a step in the right direction. I
          would also suggest providing reviewers with detailed guidelines
          on how to write a review, including examples of what constitutes
          good and bad reviews. Finally, instituting a best reviewer award
          might help; each review could be rated on a 1-5 scale by the
          authors, and the reviewer who gets the most points would get an
          award.

          [15]February 27, 2013 at 11:05 AM [16][icon_delete13.gif]

   Anonymous said...
          20-person PC with one chair and no PC-authored submissions;
          there's nothing definitively wrong with it either.
          I was a bit surprised by this comment. Having a single person
          read 40-60 submissions for something as career changing as a
          STOC acceptance seems rather wrong to me.
          Aside from increasing the noise, it leads to a timid reviewing
          process. Time constraints means that incremental improvements
          over well known problems are favored over deeper research which
          takes longer to digest.
          As well the reluctance to change the program size is also very
          surprising. The percentage of papers in the field that STOC
          captures has gone down by an order of magnitude (if not two)
          within our lifetimes, yet for some reason the "radical" choice
          is to forestall this decline. Going to a three session
          conference would put us back roughly to where STOC was in 1999.

          [17]February 27, 2013 at 11:16 AM [18][icon_delete13.gif]

   [19]Jeff Erickson said...
          I can answer Joan's questions for PC members:
          Yes, I spent less significantly time overall but significantly
          more time per paper.
          Yes, I found the whole experience significantly less stressful
          than a traditional PC.
          No, the opportunity to submit was not a factor in my decision to
          serve.
          I don't think I reviewed any submissions from other PC members,
          but in light of HotCRP's handling of conflicts of interest, I
          would not have found it awkward.
          The only thing that was really awkward were discussions about
          whether a particular paper should really be accepted given the
          competitiveness of this year's submissions. Because I only
          reviewed a dozen papers (and looked briefly at maybe twice that
          many), and discussions were limited to individual papers (or
          sometimes pairs), it was essentially impossible to have the
          global view necessary to make that judgement.
          But this is a relatively minor issue. The program would still
          have been excellent if all the final-round decisions had been
          made by independent coin flips.
          [20]February 27, 2013 at 11:23 AM [21][icon_delete13.gif]

   [22]Michael Mitzenmacher said...
          I'm enjoying all of the comment; I especially appreciate Jeff's,
          as I know Joan is hoping to see feedback from the PC on these
          issues. Of course, you can always mail her directly, but if you
          feel like commenting on your PC experience as Jeff did, it's
          very welcome.
          (Of course comments from all others -- those who submitted
          papers or people in other communities who want to relate their
          PC experience to this discussion -- are eagerly welcomed to
          continue commenting also!)

          [23]February 27, 2013 at 12:25 PM [24][icon_delete13.gif]

   Giorgos said...
          I am not sure if that was the case for STOC, but one thing that
          strikes me as odd is that I often have to rate my own reviews by
          providing some confidence level. I find this rather useless, and
          I wonder if it ends up making any difference. (Why would I
          volunteer to write a review if my confidence is low in the first
          place?)
          Instead, to improve review quality, I think reviewers should be
          rating each others' reviews, possibly only revealing these
          scores to the EC/PC chair. This would both incentivize better
          reviewing, and provide useful feedback to the EC/PC chair. Not
          to mention that it would be very little extra work for the
          reviewers who have just spent a few hours each reading the paper
          in question.
          Anon 11:05 AM: I think authors rating reviews won't work: it's
          done too late in the process to make a difference, and I guess
          it would be severely biased. Would the reviewer of a rejected
          paper ever win the award you are proposing?

          [25]February 27, 2013 at 1:04 PM [26][icon_delete13.gif]

   Anonymous said...
          After serving in many committees over the years, I've been in
          two or three where the number of submissions was below the
          historical average. As a consequence the PC load was lower than
          expected. In all cases the quality of the reviews by the PC
          members was invariably much better and the papers were discussed
          to much greater depth.

          [27]February 27, 2013 at 5:22 PM [28][icon_delete13.gif]

   Joan Feigenbaum said...
          Thanks to all of you who have posted these great comments. I
          will read them once a day and post replies to all of those that
          pose questions I can answer or otherwise cry out for a direct
          reply.
          Anonymous at 9:52 AM: PC members were not allowed to delegate
          unconditionally to "subreviewers," but they were not discouraged
          from asking students, colleagues, and outside experts for input.
          In fact, there were some submissions on which we were totally
          dependent on outside experts. It turns out that the scope of
          STOC is so broad that even 62 very highly credentialed PC
          members don't collectively have all of the expertise that's
          needed.
          Anonymous at 10:42 AM: I'm glad that you got some detailed
          reviews! I wish that everyone had. Still don't know how to
          accomplish that, though.
          Anonymous at 10:50 AM: Noise indeed. Everyone (literally!) who
          submitted obeyed the submission instructions. The STOC 2013
          Executive Committee agrees with you that the most
          straightforward thing to do is to use precisely the same page
          limit and format for the submissions as we use for the
          proceedings. Many other CS communities do the same thing; it's
          not a barrier to entry for anyone who really wants to submit to
          STOC. So the real question is what the page limit and format
          should be for our proceedings. ACM told me that there's a
          one-column format in the works and that it will be suitable for
          reading on screens, including tablet screens and small screens.
          Hallelujah! I hate two-column format, and it's a vestige of the
          print era; we'll be rid of it soon. As far as the number of
          pages goes, I think we should preserve a clear distinction
          between conference publications and journal publications; the
          former should clearly be "extended abstracts" (and hence have
          strict and fairly small page limits), and the latter should be
          full papers (and hence not limited wrt number of pages). This
          should be part of the general discussion about the form and
          function of STOC that I advocated in my answers to MIchael's
          questions.
          Anonymous at 11:16 AM: I had a very weak interpretation of
          "nothing definitively wrong" in mind, to wit: If all we want to
          do is continue producing three-day, two-track conferences with
          20-minute talks each one of which corresponds to one
          high-quality proceedings contribution, then we can stick with
          traditional PCs if we want to. We can also use two-tiered PCs
          like the one I used, and we can probably follow lots of other
          committee procedures as well. There's a plethora of good
          submissions, and it's easy to choose a good subset. Each PC
          Chair should just follow the committee procedure that he or she
          likes best. The interesting question is whether all we want for
          the future of STOC is traditional three-day, two-track programs
          of 20-minute talks. I hope we'll consider many other
          possibilities.
          Jeff E.: THANKS!
          [29]February 27, 2013 at 8:20 PM [30][icon_delete13.gif]

   Joan Feigenbaum said...
          Anonymous at 11:16: I forgot to reply to your comment about
          three parallel tracks vs two. As I said in my answers to Mike's
          questions, I'm strongly in favor of experimentation with the
          format of the conference, including the number of parallel
          sessions. I think that some of the STOC 2013 EC members agree
          with me about that. We simply thought that it would be cleaner
          to experiment with exactly one of the product or the process but
          not both simultaneously. Future program committees and their
          chairs should conduct more experiments. We may need a
          groundswell of demand for more experimentation; there's a very
          conservative contingent among those who wield power in the
          theory community.

          [31]February 27, 2013 at 8:48 PM [32][icon_delete13.gif]

   [33]Russell Impagliazzo said...
          As a PC member, my general impression of the experiment is that
          it was a failure. I was somewhat biased against it to start, but
          worried more about the results than the experience. It surprised
          me how negative the actual experience of being a PC member was.
          1. I spent about half as much time as I would have for a
          standard STOC PC, reviewing about 1/4 of the papers I would
          have. This is about twice as much time per paper. But I ended up
          feeling like I had spent an inadequate amount of time per paper.
          2. The process was immensely stressful, much more than being on
          a PC. That is because I felt blinded by not having a global
          view. I was asked to make recommendations about where a paper
          stood relative to others when I hadn't read or even seen the
          abstracts to the others we were comparing it to.
          3. This year, being able to submit papers was not a big issue,
          although I took advantage of it. In steady state, I expect it
          would become very important, since I would expect to be asked to
          be on a STOC/FOCS committee three times as often as with a
          committee 1/3 the size.
          I didn't ``lose interest'' in the process, but not having a PC
          meeting meant it became harder to keep track of the schedule,
          and other obligations began to take priority. It was like Jaws
          2: just when I thought I was safe, something else came along. I
          really feel bad that I didn't do a better job of writing clear
          reviews and spending more time getting the context of a paper
          right.
          I think, as others have said, the high quality of submissions
          made the process fault-tolerant. Any heuristic would lead to a
          pretty good conference, if not the ``optimal'' one.But papers
          were only initially reviewed by two people, who were usually not
          the world's experts on the particular subject since sub-referees
          were discouraged. And if neither reviewer thought it was great
          (which was the standard for being further considered), it was
          then rejected without further review at all. So I think probably
          many deserving papers got rejected through getting the wrong
          reviewers.
          I also feel bad that the reviews I wrote are, e.g., nowhere near
          as helpful as if I were writing a review of a paper I was really
          familiar with as a sub-referee. I was assigned papers that met
          my general interests, but not usually where I had detailed
          knowledge of the subject in advance. So I might not know about
          related work, for example. Like on a normal committee, I was
          mainly reviewing for interest not technical correctness, and
          didn't have time or expertise to verify most of the claims.
          After serving on a normal PC, I have a vastly improved vision of
          the state of ToC as a whole. Right now, I really don't have much
          idea even about what papers got into STOC, never mind their
          significance. So the experience is personally less rewarding and
          more frustrating.
          In short, I doubt I'd agree to be on such an extended PC again,
          even with the ability to submit papers.
          Russell

          [34]February 27, 2013 at 9:19 PM [35][icon_delete13.gif]

   [36]Maurice said...
          As a PC member, I can testify that I did spend more time on each
          paper, I did find it less onerous than usual, and I would have
          been reluctant to sign up for the usual PC load, given the other
          demands on my time.

          [37]February 27, 2013 at 9:46 PM [38][icon_delete13.gif]

   [39]Maurice said...
          As a PC member, I can testify that I did spend more time on each
          paper, I did find it less onerous than usual, and I would have
          been reluctant to sign up for the usual PC load, given the other
          demands on my time.

          [40]February 27, 2013 at 9:47 PM [41][icon_delete13.gif]

   [42]Suresh Venkatasubramanian said...
          Regarding Russell's comments:
          * on the feeling of still not having enough time per paper.
          I wonder if the experiment is incomplete in that regard. The
          typical data mining conference has 700-800 submissions (and
          increasing!). They have two-tier PCs, and while the functions of
          the EC and PC are not exactly the same, they are essentially
          similar. However, a typical PC is 300+ people, and a typical
          "EC" is 35-40 people. Given that the number of papers is about
          2.5X, we're not seeing the right PC size or EC size.
          * on the frustration over not getting a global view
          I wonder if this is a consequence of the blending of the two
          modes of PC. In our traditional 1-tier model, PC members
          participate actively in discussions on papers. In the two-tier
          model (again referring back to the PCs I've been on) the "PC"
          members act like external reviewers, and it's the "EC" that does
          the deliberation. In other words, one should not expect to be
          getting a total view from reviewing 12 papers, and one should
          not be asked to rate papers in that way. that's the (larger)
          EC's job.

          [43]February 27, 2013 at 10:12 PM [44][icon_delete13.gif]

   Joan Feigenbaum said...
          Suresh: I'm not sure where you got this idea, but it's not true
          that "the 'EC' [did] the deliberation." PC members absolutely
          "deliberated" (at great length!) about the submissions that were
          assigned to them and, in some cases, about other submissions as
          well. The main responsibility of the EC during the period
          between the first round of (relatively easy) accept/reject
          decisions and the final (much harder) round of decisions was
          precisely to facilitate discussions by PC members who disagreed
          about the submissions whose fate hadn't been decided. Groups of
          PC members used the HotCRP "comment" facility extensively both
          to discuss individual submissions and to discuss sets of
          comparable submissions.
          I think that there are also some misapprehensions out there
          about two aspects of the procedure:
          (1) As I said in response to Anonymous at 9:52 AM, we did get
          extensive input from people who were not on the PC. Although PC
          members were not allowed simply to delegate a review
          unconditionally to a "subreviewer," and they were required to
          come up with their own numerical scores, they were advised to
          ask for comments from outside experts whenever such outside
          expertise was needed and to incorporate outsiders' comments into
          their reviews. EC members also sought comments from outside
          experts when they were needed; I myself obtained long, detailed
          reviews from outside experts on a few submissions that no PC
          member felt comfortable evaluating. Both reviews and HotCRP
          comments for this conference were full of prefatory remarks by
          PC and EC members of the form "the following comments were
          provided by so-and-so."
          (2) Although each PC member was *required* to review and/or
          comment on considerably fewer submissions than he would have
          been on a traditional PC, all PC members were allowed (indeed
          explicitly encouraged) to comment on any submissions that they
          wanted to comment on (avoiding conflicts of interest, of
          course). Indeed, some PC members chimed in on submissions that
          hadn't been assigned to them, and in several cases their
          comments led to long discussions, to requests for outside
          experts' input, and to unexpected decisions.
          On the "global view" question: Indeed, there is a stark tradeoff
          between individual PC member's having a very light workload and
          their naturally developing a global view of all of the
          submissions. To the extent that there are any precise
          "hypotheses" to what I hope will be ongoing experimentation with
          the process, one of them is definitely that many members of our
          community who are reluctant to commit the level of time and
          effort required for traditional committee service (even a
          "global view" in the offing) would be glad to make the much more
          modest commitment of time and effort that it takes to serve on a
          two-tiered committee (even if they have little prospect of a
          global view). Let's hope that we can continue to experiment with
          this and other tradeoffs.
          I should add that, over many years in the field, I've heard from
          many members of the community that they don't feel capable of a
          global view -- they think that the total scope of STOC is huge
          and that they can understand only a small portion of it. One of
          the most common reasons given for declining an invitation to
          serve on a traditional STOC or FOCS committee is that one is
          bound to be asked to review numerous submissions outside of
          one's area(s) that one is not interested in. Many people
          strongly prefer just to concentrate on fewer submissions all of
          which they understand and care about deeply.

          [45]February 28, 2013 at 1:59 AM [46][icon_delete13.gif]

   [47]ryanw said...
          I'm not as pessimistic as Russell...
          1. I definitely spent less time overall and more time per
          submission. In pretty much all cases, I felt I had a good sense
          of what the papers were about and what distinguished them from
          prior work. (In contrast, I was on simultaneously on the PODS
          program committee, and there I had a much longer/tougher
          time...)
          2. The experience was fine, I could easily do it again, but next
          time there should be a little more flexibility regarding
          subreviewers. There were a few cases where consulting an outside
          expert not at my institution would have been best for everyone.
          Perhaps a mix of "traditional" PC member roles (who may consult
          subreferees in the usual way but may not submit) and "extended"
          PC member roles (as in the experiment under discussion) would
          help.
          3. For me, the ability to submit papers was indeed a factor in
          joining. I had some ideas cooking on low boil for several months
          and I figured they may be ready around November. It wasn't
          awkward, as the topics/areas of papers I reviewed had
          essentially no relation to that of my submission. That was
          perhaps lucky, and could have gone differently -- it is not hard
          to imagine cases where recusing myself from reviewing a paper
          would be the best course of action, even though I should be
          reviewing it.

          [48]February 28, 2013 at 2:20 AM [49][icon_delete13.gif]

   [50]Suresh Venkatasubramanian said...
          Joan, maybe I wasn't clear. I didn't imply anything about the
          STOC EC - I was merely saying that in *other* venues that have a
          two-tier format, the EC does most of the deliberation, and this
          may be as it should be.
          As you rightly point out, there's a tradeoff between review load
          and the "global view" and it might very well be that the right
          balance is towards a less global view for the PC (and therefore
          lower load) combined with an active EC (or meta-reviewing body)
          that does have the global view.

          [51]February 28, 2013 at 3:02 AM [52][icon_delete13.gif]

   Anonymous said...
          Reasonable objections by well-regarded members of the community:
          "Noise."
          Confirmation bias: No one risked outright rejection by
          submitting in the wrong format, thereby validating our choice.

          [53]February 28, 2013 at 3:42 AM [54][icon_delete13.gif]

   [55]robert-kleinberg said...
          My answers to Joan's questions:
          1. I spent significantly less time overall than when I'm on a
          traditional PC, and I spent more time per paper. The time spent
          per paper was in between (a) the amount of time I spend on a
          paper that I assign to a subreviewer when I am on a traditional
          PC; (b) the amount of time I spend when I am a subreviewer for
          someone else serving on a traditional PC. The time spent per
          paper was much closer to (b) than (a).
          2. I'd be willing to do it more often than serving on a
          traditional PC, because the workload is so much lighter. On the
          other hand, given a choice between serving on one traditional PC
          or two PCs like this one, I would greatly prefer to serve on one
          traditional PC (even if it was somewhat more than twice the
          workload) for the reason Russell explained: "After serving on a
          normal PC, I have a vastly improved vision of the state of ToC
          as a whole." This new PC format doesn't afford the same benefit
          to its members.
          3. Once again, Russell's answer sums up my view: "This year,
          being able to submit papers was not a big issue, although I took
          advantage of it. In steady state, I expect it would become very
          important, since I would expect to be asked to be on a STOC/FOCS
          committee three times as often as with a committee 1/3 the
          size."
          4. For this conference, none of papers assigned to me had an
          author on the PC. I've served on other PCs for conferences that
          allowed PC-authored submissions and didn't find it excessively
          awkward.

          [56]February 28, 2013 at 10:23 AM [57][icon_delete13.gif]

   [58]Mikkel Thorup said...
          This was my 10th STOC/FOCS PC. I think Joan did an excellent job
          and introduced many good ideas, but I do think that the 2-tier
          system is a fundamental mistake that we will suffer from in the
          long run if it is continued.
          CRITICISM
          I will go straight to what I see as the main problem, and return
          with some praise in the end.
          The easy job of a PC is to compare like papers on similar
          subjects. The hard part is to compare accross areas, attempting
          some uniform accept level. This is where STOC/FOCS traditionally
          do much much better than journals.
          What makes cross-area comparision work with a traditional PC is
          that many of the more senior members have worked in several
          areas. Handling papers from multiple areas they offer direct
          cross-comparisons. Here, by a direct comparison of two papers, I
          mean a comparison done by a PC member who is responsible for
          both papers.
          One of the ideas in the 2-tiered EC/PC was to minimize the
          number of cross-comparisons. It was attempted to let PC members
          handle like (same area)
          papers, so most of the direct comparisons where not across
          areas.
          On top of that, note that with the same total reading load, we
          get only half as many direct comparisons if we double the PC
          size, giving each PC member only half the load; namely (2k
          choose 2) versus 2*(k choose 2).
          The result is that we have an EC doing cross comparisons
          indirectly, relying on the scores from different PC members for
          different fields. This means that we rely on PC members from
          different fields to have a uniform sense of quality. This is
          pretty much the problem with journals, where standards are much
          more fluctuating across fields.
          I do not think the problem is big yet, because thanks to the
          work of past STOC/FOCS PCs, we all have a pretty good feeling
          for STOC/FOCS standards. I am not saying that these are even
          remotely perfect, and
          there will always be lots of papers in the gray zone, but
          compared with the journal situation, I think STOC/FOCS has a far
          more uniform accept level (the fact that conference papers are
          not refereed for
          correctness is a totally different issue).
          Without direct cross-comparisons, subfields get to evaluate
          themselves, and establish their own standards.
          So stepping back: the hard part of selecting a program is to
          select across subflields. Normally, we have a PC of 20 members
          doing this in a discussion involving many direct cross
          comparisons. Instead this was done by a hardworking EC with only
          10 members relying on different PC members
          for reviews on different fields.
          Joan was very focussed on getting good direct comparisons of
          like papers, but I think that has been a main emphasis of any PC
          chair I have served under... while it is the easier thing to do,
          it is also
          the one that is most embarrassing to get wrong. As mentioned
          above, with more PC members handling fewer papers, we simply had
          much fewer direct
          comparisons than usual.
          Because of character limit, praise and conclusion follows in
          second comment.
          [59]February 28, 2013 at 5:14 PM [60][icon_delete13.gif]

   [61]Mikkel Thorup said...
          This is second part of my comment..
          PRAISE
          I think Joan was successful reducing the work load per PC
          member. One of the interesting new ideas was to have an initial
          round with only two reviewers per paper, thus trying to handle
          all the easy cases with minimal resources. I do think such an
          adaptive approach is a good idea. Many of us procastinate, doing
          things as close to deadline as possible. Having an initial round
          has two advantages: (1) spreading out the work, getting some
          done early for the initial round, and (2) minimizing the work on
          easy cases. I later got called in on other papers needing more
          reviews.
          About PC members submitting. I have no strong opinion. Obviously
          this meant that we got some extra submissions to this STOC. Next
          FOCS will be missing the submissions that it normally get from
          the preceding STOC PC.
          Also, I was quite happy with the electronic PC. Have tried
          electronic PCs both at SODA and at one previous STOC.
          All in all, this time I felt like a glorified referee, with very
          little feel for the overall program. With more effort, I could
          have have helped much more with the global program, but getting
          a global view would imply spending the same time as on a normal
          PC, and having 50 PC members do that would hugely increase the
          total work load for the community. Moreover, since I knew the EC
          would make all the final decisions, I didn't feel very motivated
          getting too involved outside my batch. That being said, I was
          totally happy with all decisions made
          on the papers I handled.

          [62]February 28, 2013 at 5:15 PM [63][icon_delete13.gif]

   [64]Russell Impagliazzo said...
          As someone posted earlier, the quality of reviews is affected by
          the number of submissions relative to the expected number. In
          other words, if you get less than you expected, you do a better
          job, and more than you expected, you do worse. The time required
          here was less than a normal PC, but more than I expected, and
          more than I budgeted for. If I did it again, I would budget more
          time, and maybe it would be less unpleasant and I would do a
          better job.
          Maybe the actual sub-referee policy was less strict than what I
          thought. The papers were in my general areas, but for only a few
          would I (or someone I work with) be a suitable sub-referee. In
          particular, what I worried about was being ignorant of related
          work that was not cited in the
          submission.

          [65]February 28, 2013 at 6:38 PM [66][icon_delete13.gif]

   Anonymous said...
          This post is an utter shame, and this experiment is an utter
          failure.
          As few (or no?) external reviewers are summoned, while the
          committee is not representative enough, especially when the COI
          is taken into account, the review process is terribly bad. Many
          submissions were reviewed by totally irrelevant and incompetent
          reviewers, though they're real experts in their own area.
          As a result, we might expect the lowest quality in general since
          the inception of STOC. It will surprise nobody if FOCS'13 turns
          out to contain better papers than STOC. WHAT A SHAME!

          [67]March 1, 2013 at 2:39 AM [68][icon_delete13.gif]

   Anonymous said...
          With most high-quality conferences, I accept that random choices
          (after filtering) lead to a good program (albeit not optimal),
          and I don't mind (that much) even if my own deserving papers get
          rejected.
          That is how I feel about the normal reviewing structure. But in
          the case, I was left unsatisfied by a 2-review rejection of one
          of my submissions: One review was by an admitted nonexpert, and
          hence probably had little chance of receiving the strongest
          score. The other review was one of the lowest-quality reviews I
          have ever received. An outright rejection at this point is
          disappointing.
          In my opinion, if this process is continued, the first-round
          rejections should be augmented to account for the quality of
          reviews. A paper should not be rejected based on first-round
          scores if the scores themselves are meaningless.

          [69]March 1, 2013 at 5:49 PM [70][icon_delete13.gif]

   Anonymous said...
          I was a member of the outer PC. (I prefer not to identify myself
          for reasons that will be obvious from the contents of this
          comment.)
          I am afraid that my experience is largely consistent with that
          of "Anonymous March 1, 2013 at 5:49 PM". A significant fraction
          of the papers I dealt with received at least one very
          superficial and low-quality review. Such reviews almost always
          corresponded to mediocre (though usually not really low) scores.
          I think that in the normal three-review process one such review,
          if matched by two positive and more thorough reviews, would not
          torpedo a paper. This year, with only two reviews, even in cases
          where the other review was significantly more positive and more
          thorough, the paper rarely survived to receive a third review.
          Like Russell and Mikkel, I felt that I did not get a 'global'
          view of the submissions pool, so the experience of being on the
          PC was somehow unsatisfying (while certainly less time-consuming
          than it would have been to manage 40+ papers under the usual
          process).
          Apart from other aspects of the process, I think the fact that
          so many papers received only two reviews is a significant
          drawback of this STOC as opposed to previous conferences. This
          feels to me like a step in the wrong direction -- a colleague
          recently told me over lunch how his submission to a top systems
          conference received *nine* detailed reviews. I was ashamed to
          say that our flagship conferences in theory are experimenting
          with two reviews, down from three, and that those reviews are
          sometimes very superficial.
          [71]March 1, 2013 at 11:47 PM [72][icon_delete13.gif]

   Anonymous said...
          (Same commenter as previous comment) I would like to emphasize
          that I don't at all blame Joan for the negative aspects I
          described above. She obviously worked extremely hard and
          repeatedly urged the committee members to do good reviewing, but
          this didn't always stick.
          I think it's good that STOC did this experiment, but my sense is
          that having many papers receive only two reviews should be
          avoided in the future. The real issue is how to increase the
          overall cultural norms of reviewing quality in our field.

          [73]March 1, 2013 at 11:52 PM [74][icon_delete13.gif]

   [75]Michael Mitzenmacher said...
          While I'm making an effort not to respond, I do have to clear
          something up for the last anonymous.
          Papers were initially assigned 2 reviewers. After the first
          stage, they were rejected only if they got two very low (clear
          reject) scores. Even if these papers had gotten a 3rd review,
          they were never going to make the top list. They didn't have one
          positive score where another review might give them two positive
          scores. They had two (very) negative scores; they weren't
          getting accepted.
          Now, I do think that the papers left after the 3rd round should
          have consistently obtained a 3rd (or even 4th) review; that's a
          different matter, and I do think Joan discussed that if she did
          it again she would have had additional reviewers pre-assigned
          for papers in the 2nd round.
          I think there's nothing wrong (and a lot right) with a system
          that does 2 initial reviews and cuts a number of papers off at
          that point, and then focuses on the remaining X%, for some
          reasonable X and cutoff method.

          [76]March 2, 2013 at 11:03 AM [77][icon_delete13.gif]

   Joan Feigenbaum said...
          Thanks again to all who have commented on the STOC 2013
          experiment. There are three themes in these comments that I'd
          like to respond to. I'll address two here and one in my next
          message.
          "Failure": I am taken aback by Russell's and other's use of this
          extremely derogatory word. As I explained in my original post,
          the goals of this experiment were (unavoidably, given how the
          experiment was undertaken) extremely modest and extremely vague.
          To the extent that I can sum them up briefly, they were to
          answer the question "Can we produce a high-quality STOC program
          with a different committee process from the one we've
          traditionally used"? and "Which changes to the process should we
          consider"? We now have one (multidimensional) data point with
          which to start answering those questions. If the answer to the
          first question is "no," then the community has the option of
          simply reverting to the traditional process. That doesn't make
          the experiment a "failure."
          Are some of you using "the experiment was a failure" to mean "I
          did not enjoy participating in this process"? If so, I think
          that's nonsensical. One thing we can learn from experimentation
          is what type of process potential committee members prefer
          participating in. Eliciting that information is a sign that the
          experiment was a success, not that it was failure.
          (BTW, unsurprisingly, the PC members who really liked this
          alternative process have, for the most part, been emailing their
          views to me privately rather than blogging about them. I feel
          sort of like a professor reading course evaluations -- it's the
          dissatisfied students who feel the deepest need to make their
          views known. :=))
          Early accept/reject decisions based on two reviews: No decisions
          were made based only on numerical scores; the EC read the
          reviews carefully and in many cases asked for additional input
          from PC members and outside experts before making any decisions.
          Moreover, all PC members were empowered to prevent early
          decisions. Approximately a week and a half after the first round
          of scores and reviews were due, I sent email to the entire PC
          telling them (1) tentative early decisions had been made, and PC
          members had 12 days to raise objections and concerns before
          those early decisions were finalized, and (2) they were (as I
          had told them earlier) welcome to comment on any submissions
          they wished to comment on, regardless of whether those
          submissions had been assigned to them (except, of course, for
          those with which they have CoIs). In fact, some PC members did
          raise objections and concerns during those 12 days, and some
          decisions were postponed for exactly that reason. If there are
          PC members who now think that particular submissions got short
          shrift, we need to ask why those PC members did not raise these
          concerns during the deliberation process when they were asked
          for their input. Perhaps that problem can be avoided in the
          future by (as I also suggested in my original post) setting a
          firm schedule at the beginning and making sure that everyone is
          aware of it.
          That being said, I certainly agree (and said in my original
          post) that the quality of reviews in our community has always
          been inadequate and was inadequate this time as well. I hoped
          that the markedly light load on each PC member would result in
          (almost) uniformly thorough reviews, but it did not. Rather than
          focus on whether we should demand two or three reviews on each
          submission, I think we should figure out how to get good reviews
          on submissions to theory submissions. Does anyone have any
          ideas?
          [78]March 2, 2013 at 11:44 AM [79][icon_delete13.gif]

   Joan Feigenbaum said...
          This is the continuation of my previous post.
          Global view: As I said in an earlier post, it is impossible for
          a PC member to have both an extremely light work load and a
          global view. The main value proposition to potential PC members
          whom I invited to serve on this committee was the chance to
          handle few papers but to do a very thorough job on each one.
          Almost everyone whom I invited accepted the invitation, and many
          expressed delight that they'd be handling few submissions and
          could do a great job on each one. It never occurred to me to
          warn them that they would not have a "global view"; I thought
          that that was obvious. Recall that PC members who wanted a
          broader view than just their assigned submissions were welcome
          to read and comment on other submissions. Some of them did so;
          perhaps that's a disjoint set from people now regretting that
          they didn't have a global view!
          Anyway, this is another example of valuable information that
          we've gained from this experiment: Even though they didn't think
          about it when they accepted the invitation to serve, some people
          care a lot about "having a global view." Another way in which
          the experiment was a success!
          Note that all of the so-called "subreferees" that traditional
          PCs enlist for detailed reviews also don't have a global view.
          (BTW, I think that we should simply call these people
          "reviewers" or "outside experts" or something else more
          accurate. We don't do full-fledged "refereeing" for conferences,
          and so there is no "referee" to which they people are sub'd.)
          There are several important functions that must be performed in
          order to put together the program. They include:
          1. Detailed (written) reviewing.
          2. Discussion of individual submissions (especial those about
          which reviewers disagree).
          3. Discussion/comparison of comparable submissions to determine
          which are better than others.
          4. Overall balance, apportionment of space to various technical
          areas, and attempts to compare, for lack of a better word,
          incomparable submissions. Here is where one needs the vaunted
          "global view."
          Somehow, we need to assign these functions to PC members and
          outside experts. Traditionally, we have a monolithic PC that
          takes on all of 1 - 4 and delegates some of 1. I maintain that
          there's no reason that that division of labor is sacrosanct, and
          I think that the STOC 2013 experiment, which produced a
          high-quality program, is evidence that I'm right. I think we
          should continue to experiment with a variety of divisions of
          labor.

          [80]March 2, 2013 at 11:44 AM [81][icon_delete13.gif]

   [82]Mikkel Thorup said...
          I agree with Joan that it was a important experiment, and that
          it is not a failure to perform such experiments.
          My fundamental objection is that we had only 10 EC members with
          the global view, relying on different local PC members for
          reviews for different areas.
          This it to be contrasted with 20 traditional PC members being
          involved both globally and directly in the papers.
          As Joan pointed out, having 50 local PC members work globally
          would defeat the purpose of reduced work load for local PC
          members.
          I don't think more thorough reports are going to have any
          significant effect on acceptance/rejections. The significance of
          a paper should be explained in the abstract and introduction of
          a paper. The body of the paper (and possibly appendices) serves
          mostly to justify the claims made in abstract and intro. If
          there are some particularly interesting technical details, then
          the intro should at et least point to them, so the referee knows
          to check them out. I normally only read further details if the
          claims made surprise me, and very often this is when I end up
          finding a bug in the submission.
          I myself had a paper rejected based on two reviews. While I
          disagree with the conclusion of the referees (otherwise I would
          not have submitted), I do not think it would have made any
          difference if these particular referees had read and reviewed my
          paper in any more detail.
          Conference refereeing is extremely taxing for the community,
          making it very hard to get reviewers for the proper journal
          refereeing, which is where the detailed refereeing is really
          needed.
          Finally, getting a good program is not hard based on the
          submissions (this time with the extra PC submissions that would
          otherwise have gone to FOCS'13). The hard part is to try to be
          as fair as possible in the rejections.
          Let me also say that I am proud of our community. I have had
          experience with systems conferences (both accepts and rejects),
          and while they may generate more reviews, the quality of those
          reviews in terms of understanding has typically been abysmal. I
          don't think we have much to learn from them.
          [83]March 2, 2013 at 1:42 PM [84][icon_delete13.gif]

   [85]Mikkel Thorup said...
          Concerning participating in the PC, I participated for the sake
          of STOC. I was skeptical about 2-tier, and thought it very
          important that such an experiment was not run by only the people
          believing in it. I also wanted to help STOC'13 as much as
          possible, giving the 2-tier system the best chances. I told Joan
          up-front about my skepticism, and that I would write my opinion
          about the experiment.
          My expectations were even worse, and I think Joan did a
          surprisingly good job.

          [86]March 2, 2013 at 2:07 PM [87][icon_delete13.gif]

   [88]Suresh Venkatasubramanian said...
          Joan's framing of the different tasks a PC performs and how one
          might refactor them is incredibly useful, and is an excellent
          basis for continued discussion. I don't see how this experiment
          is a failure at all. It's an experiment, and it has generated
          observations and thoughts for the next experiment. Of course
          there's something both hilarious and ironic about theoreticians
          arguing about the nature of an experiment :).

          [89]March 2, 2013 at 6:18 PM [90][icon_delete13.gif]

   [91]Russell Impagliazzo said...
          I apologize to Joan for using loaded language. I only meant
          that, for me, the answer to the question ``Does the new process
          produce good results with less work and stress?'' was no. Thus,
          the hypothesis the experiment was designed to test (if all the
          other runs were to be like mine) was not confirmed, and hence
          the experiment ``failed''. I didn't mean to imply that
          performing the experiment was not worthwhile, nor that it was
          not correctly designed, only that the outcome did not verify the
          hypothesis.
          Russell

          [92]March 3, 2013 at 3:12 AM [93][icon_delete13.gif]

   [94]Michael Mitzenmacher said...
          So, just to be clear Russell, while you have your opinion, it
          seems far from universal.

          [95]March 3, 2013 at 8:04 PM [96][icon_delete13.gif]

   Anonymous said...
          Just as one more data point: this was the first time I got a
          STOC/FOCS review from a reviewer who showed no understanding of
          the field, and barely any understanding of the results of the
          paper. The review was close to nonsensical. The other review was
          extremely high quality and very useful.
          The obvious explanation is that there was only one expert on the
          PC qualified to review the paper (checking the list of PC
          members confirms this). I do understand the usefulness of making
          a first round of quick decisions after two reviews. However, I
          think that once a paper makes the cut and is eventually
          accepted, it should receive an additional review -- a great
          review and a bad one felt like less feedback than I get from
          other STOC/FOCS committees.
          Also, it seems that even though reviewers could ask the opinion
          of outside experts, some felt disinclined to do so, even when
          they were ill prepared to judge a paper.

          [97]March 4, 2013 at 12:22 AM [98][icon_delete13.gif]

   Anonymous said...
          While I do find this open discussion useful and interesting, I
          think it would be good to collect some harder data. Joan could
          run a poll among the members of the PC and EC and then release
          the numbers (maybe separately for PC and EC). For instances, we
          could ask a question like the following.
          Do you think STOC should adopt a two-tier PC approach in the
          future:
          a) no
          b) yes, possibly with minor changes from this year
          c) yes, but with major changes
          This would give us some quantitative feedback complementing the
          more qualitative feedback. In particular since, as Joan pointed
          out, the feedback received so far might suffer from a selection
          bias.

          [99]March 4, 2013 at 9:24 AM [100][icon_delete13.gif]

   Joan Feigenbaum said...
          Russell: Apology accepted.
          Anonymous on March 1, 2013 at 11:47 PM: Nine reviews per
          conference submission is just about the most asinine thing I've
          ever heard about a CS conference! We simply do not need nine
          reviews in order to make sound accept/reject decisions and to
          give constructive feedback to authors. Perhaps systems people
          don't mind wasting their time on this type of overkill, but
          wasting STOC and FOCS people's time in that manner would be
          criminal.
          Anonymous on March 4, 2013 at 9:24 AM: In fact, after Jeff E.
          took the lead and, in his comment, answered the four questions I
          mentioned in my original post, I emailed the entire PC and asked
          them either to blog their answers to those four questions or to
          email me their answers. I plan to summarize the results and
          distribute the summary in some medium or other. However, I must
          warn everyone that the majority of the PC members have not
          answered. Somehow, this feels analogous to the fact that many PC
          members did not write thorough reviews. There seem to be some
          things that STOC PC members feel they must do and some that they
          don't. Fortunately for all of us, they do seem to feel obligated
          to put together a high-quality STOC program by whatever means
          necessary!

          [101]March 4, 2013 at 1:38 PM [102][icon_delete13.gif]

   Anonymous said...
          I completely agree with Anonymous on March 1, 2013 at 11:47 PM:
          Accepting and more importantly Rejecting
          papers based on only two reviews was
          a failure of this two-tiered PC. Indeed this was my first
          experience of a CS theory conferenc with only two reports.

          [103]March 4, 2013 at 11:39 PM [104][icon_delete13.gif]

   Aleksander Madry said...
          1) I spent probably half as much time as on the SODA 2013 PC I
          just had been on before.
          Also, it was a much more enjoyable job as most of the papers I
          got to look at I truly wanted to read.
          Needless to say, this resulted in me spending more time on
          reading the submissions and ability to make much more
          knowledgeable recommendation on them.
          2) It was definitely less stressful and more manageable. So,
          indeed, I should be willing to do it more often.
          3) Yes, being able to submit was a factor in my decision
          (although, I ended up not submitting anything). I don't like
          this aspect in traditional PCs when you have to decide
          half-a-year in advance if there is something you will want to
          submit or not. (And if you have some co-authors this becomes
          even more complicated.)
          I did not feel awkward when reviewing PC member's submission. (I
          do not see much difference between reviewing PC member's
          submission and evaluating submission by my other colleagues.)
          Also, the fact that I had time (and expertise) to make a fairly
          knowledgeable assessment - and thus stand by my decision - for
          most of the submissions I was handling, was a factor here too.
          Finally, one point I would like to make is that - similarly, to
          others commenting here - I really felt that the process behind
          making the final accept/reject decisions by the EC committee was
          very opaque to me. Of course, I could feel that our reviews were
          taken into account and there was a chance for us to discuss some
          of these preliminary decisions. But, overall, the thought
          process of the EC - especially, behind deciding between papers
          from different areas - was not disclosed to the PC.
          I am not saying that this is necessarily bad, but I would feel
          better if the invitation to the PC was more upfront about the
          fairly limited role of PC members in the whole selection
          process.
          However, I must say that I am happy with the final program of
          STOC (at least, regarding the papers I have some knowledge
          about).
          [105]March 6, 2013 at 4:53 AM [106][icon_delete13.gif]

   Joan Feigenbaum said...
          Alex: Thanks for your comments. I agree with you that the PC
          Chair should explain the entire process that will be followed in
          making accept/reject decisions when the invitations to serve on
          the PC are issued; I certainly would have done so had I known
          exactly what the process would be. This time, we were making
          much of this "experimental" process up as we went along, and we
          really didn't know exactly what we were going to do until we did
          it. If the community continues to experiment with two-tiered
          PCs, I expect future chairs to benefit from our experience, to
          determine the entire process and schedule before getting
          started, and to make potential PC members aware of them.

          [107]March 12, 2013 at 10:17 AM [108][icon_delete13.gif]

   Sanjeev Arora said...
          I enjoyed reading about this experiment. I have told SIGACT
          chairs before that there is no reason why traditional PCs have
          to stay at a size of 20. (The main reason as far as I can tell
          is to keep down the budget for PC meeting.) Sigact has a big
          reserve fund! Use it to subsidize the PC meeting and raise the
          size to 30. That would again reduce load per PC member to a more
          manageable 30-35.
          I'll also send this suggestion to Paul Beame (new SIGACT chair)
          privately.
          On a different note, I think experimenting with the product (to
          use Joan's term) is more important.

          [109]March 13, 2013 at 1:39 AM [110][icon_delete13.gif]

   [111]Mikkel Thorup said...
          Hi Sanjeev,
          About the magic size 20, it is of course not magic, but it is a
          balance based on experience.
          As discussed by many above, the cost of a global view is an
          additive cost per PC member. The total global work load is thus
          proportional to the PC size, so for this cost, the work load on
          the community is minimized by a small PC.
          Joan realized this, which is why she for a larger PC, introduced
          a small EC, where only the EC had the global view.
          The large PC was focussed on the refereeing, which parallellizes
          perfectly since the total refereeing load only depends on the
          number of submissions and the number of reviews per submission
          (Joan cut this to an initial 2, which is something that could
          also be done with a normal PC).
          One prize payed was that for selecting papers from areas in
          different fields, the EC relied on reports from different PC
          members. In my opinion, this makes it much harder to make fair
          selection across areas. In a traditional PC, besides the simple
          comparison of like papers, you have PC members handling papers
          from different areas, and who are all involved in the global
          outcome.
          Direct comparisons is also an argument for fewer PC members
          taking many papers (with k papers you make k^2/2 direct
          comparisons).
          All in all, from a total work load and direct comparison
          perspective, we are better off with a small PC, but this has to
          be balanced with how much work a single person can take.
          To match the regular load of 20 PC members, in the new system
          with 10 EC and 50 local PC members, for each regular PC, we now
          have to be
          on 0.5 EC and 2.5 local PC.
          Best, Mikkel

          [112]March 13, 2013 at 2:51 PM [113][icon_delete13.gif]

   [114]Post a Comment

   [115]Newer Post [116]Older Post [117]Home
   Subscribe to: [118]Post Comments (Atom)

Amazon Contextual Product Ads

   IFRAME: [119]sidebar-gadget2

Amazon SearchBox

   IFRAME: [120]sidebar-gadget1

My Book on Randomized Algorithms

   IFRAME:
   [121]http://rcm.amazon.com/e/cm?t=michaelmitzen-20&o=1&p=8&l=as1&asins=
   0521835402&fc1=000000&=1&lc1=0000ff&bc1=000000&lt1=_blank&IS2=1&f=ifr&b
   g1=ffffff&f=ifr

   There was an error in this gadget

Blog Archive

     * [122]v  [123]2013 (61)
          + [124]|>  [125]October (2)
          + [126]|>  [127]September (6)
          + [128]|>  [129]August (2)
          + [130]|>  [131]July (6)
          + [132]|>  [133]June (6)
          + [134]|>  [135]May (6)
          + [136]|>  [137]April (7)
          + [138]|>  [139]March (10)
          + [140]v  [141]February (7)
               o [142]Discussing STOC 2013 PC with Joan Feigenbaum
               o [143]ICALP formatting
               o [144]Online Censorship Day and Other Links
               o [145]Daily Show
               o [146]Zachary Quinto and Cherry Jones are in Town...
               o [147]Ad Board Update
               o [148]Friday Ruminations
          + [149]|>  [150]January (9)

     * [151]|>  [152]2012 (81)
          + [153]|>  [154]December (1)
          + [155]|>  [156]November (11)
          + [157]|>  [158]October (8)
          + [159]|>  [160]September (5)
          + [161]|>  [162]August (8)
          + [163]|>  [164]July (3)
          + [165]|>  [166]June (6)
          + [167]|>  [168]May (9)
          + [169]|>  [170]April (8)
          + [171]|>  [172]March (8)
          + [173]|>  [174]February (6)
          + [175]|>  [176]January (8)

     * [177]|>  [178]2011 (78)
          + [179]|>  [180]December (12)
          + [181]|>  [182]November (9)
          + [183]|>  [184]October (11)
          + [185]|>  [186]September (10)
          + [187]|>  [188]August (2)
          + [189]|>  [190]July (8)
          + [191]|>  [192]June (12)
          + [193]|>  [194]May (7)
          + [195]|>  [196]April (4)
          + [197]|>  [198]March (2)
          + [199]|>  [200]February (1)

     * [201]|>  [202]2010 (111)
          + [203]|>  [204]December (1)
          + [205]|>  [206]October (1)
          + [207]|>  [208]August (14)
          + [209]|>  [210]July (7)
          + [211]|>  [212]June (19)
          + [213]|>  [214]May (15)
          + [215]|>  [216]April (15)
          + [217]|>  [218]March (15)
          + [219]|>  [220]February (12)
          + [221]|>  [222]January (12)

     * [223]|>  [224]2009 (173)
          + [225]|>  [226]December (11)
          + [227]|>  [228]November (11)
          + [229]|>  [230]October (14)
          + [231]|>  [232]September (17)
          + [233]|>  [234]August (14)
          + [235]|>  [236]July (7)
          + [237]|>  [238]June (16)
          + [239]|>  [240]May (15)
          + [241]|>  [242]April (16)
          + [243]|>  [244]March (16)
          + [245]|>  [246]February (23)
          + [247]|>  [248]January (13)

     * [249]|>  [250]2008 (129)
          + [251]|>  [252]December (8)
          + [253]|>  [254]November (11)
          + [255]|>  [256]October (12)
          + [257]|>  [258]September (10)
          + [259]|>  [260]August (13)
          + [261]|>  [262]July (8)
          + [263]|>  [264]June (9)
          + [265]|>  [266]May (7)
          + [267]|>  [268]April (15)
          + [269]|>  [270]March (9)
          + [271]|>  [272]February (15)
          + [273]|>  [274]January (12)

     * [275]|>  [276]2007 (91)
          + [277]|>  [278]December (10)
          + [279]|>  [280]November (11)
          + [281]|>  [282]October (12)
          + [283]|>  [284]September (11)
          + [285]|>  [286]August (17)
          + [287]|>  [288]July (15)
          + [289]|>  [290]June (15)

Science/Tech Blogs I Read

     * [291]Andrew McGregor (polylogblog)
     * [292]Andy's Math/CS page (Drucker)
     * [293]Blown to Bits
     * [294]Computational Complexity (Gasarch/Fortnow)
     * [295]Ernie's 3d Pancakes (Erickson)
     * [296]FemaleScienceProfessor
     * [297]Freedom to Tinker (Felten)
     * [298]Geomblog (Suresh)
     * [299]In Theory (Trevisan)
     * [300]Informatics Weekly (Patrascu)
     * [301]kd-PhD (Sorelle)
     * [302]Michael Nielsen
     * [303]My Slice of Pizza (Muthu)
     * [304]OxDE (Eppstein)
     * [305]Shtetl-Optimized (Aaronson)
     * [306]Structure And Strangeness (Clauset)
     * [307]Terence Tao
     * [308]Volatile and Decentralized (Matt Welsh)

Contributors

     * [309]Michael Mitzenmacher
     * [310]Michael Mitzenmacher

Legal Statement

   While I do not generally advertise on the blog, I do sometimes link to
   books, and I take part in the Amazon Associates program, getting some
   small credit if you purchase a book I recommend.

Analytics

References

   Visible links
   1. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/feeds/posts/default
   2. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/feeds/posts/default?alt=rss
   3. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/feeds/5854741366106181779/comments/default
   4. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html#main
   5. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html#sidebar
   6. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/
   7. http://www.blogger.com/profile/02161161032642563814
   8. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html
   9. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1361976755060#c6763608648051828390
  10. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=6763608648051828390
  11. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1361979733272#c7905727774635628688
  12. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=7905727774635628688
  13. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1361980205164#c8313071772501094517
  14. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=8313071772501094517
  15. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1361981124480#c9085216891841707717
  16. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=9085216891841707717
  17. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1361981778454#c4441970328556348971
  18. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=4441970328556348971
  19. http://www.blogger.com/profile/17633745186684887140
  20. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1361982233542#c8975084949380084162
  21. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=8975084949380084162
  22. http://www.blogger.com/profile/02161161032642563814
  23. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1361985939370#c2385492336051447199
  24. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=2385492336051447199
  25. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1361988288603#c2339111552142449598
  26. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=2339111552142449598
  27. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362003779821#c235357462799904010
  28. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=235357462799904010
  29. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362014416534#c9132571314780962434
  30. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=9132571314780962434
  31. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362016080873#c1923428989898119718
  32. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=1923428989898119718
  33. http://www.blogger.com/profile/18394636887484222063
  34. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362017991519#c6996617809766951891
  35. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=6996617809766951891
  36. http://www.blogger.com/profile/03019442378581634856
  37. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362019598731#c8231917638660246853
  38. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=8231917638660246853
  39. http://www.blogger.com/profile/03019442378581634856
  40. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362019654767#c3981469312771359063
  41. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=3981469312771359063
  42. http://www.blogger.com/profile/15898357513326041822
  43. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362021138360#c7664182569057023325
  44. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=7664182569057023325
  45. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362034797367#c3110891619863654645
  46. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=3110891619863654645
  47. http://www.blogger.com/profile/09644595632189419277
  48. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362036017564#c3624083231254655696
  49. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=3624083231254655696
  50. http://www.blogger.com/profile/15898357513326041822
  51. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362038544049#c4930632914570025602
  52. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=4930632914570025602
  53. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362040979820#c7849138801796593573
  54. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=7849138801796593573
  55. http://robert-kleinberg.myopenid.com/
  56. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362065018122#c1692376217235638933
  57. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=1692376217235638933
  58. http://www.blogger.com/profile/10495805784088145688
  59. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362089692222#c8676642480288730933
  60. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=8676642480288730933
  61. http://www.blogger.com/profile/10495805784088145688
  62. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362089758996#c8186494650384029773
  63. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=8186494650384029773
  64. http://www.blogger.com/profile/18394636887484222063
  65. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362094688786#c7908783256797610725
  66. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=7908783256797610725
  67. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362123565640#c6447344550824562111
  68. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=6447344550824562111
  69. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362178145643#c2879677495170115638
  70. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=2879677495170115638
  71. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362199676707#c1899554929545114234
  72. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=1899554929545114234
  73. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362199922403#c2494393113046144708
  74. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=2494393113046144708
  75. http://www.blogger.com/profile/02161161032642563814
  76. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362240232580#c7256338069555718601
  77. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=7256338069555718601
  78. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362242640801#c2817526574414774817
  79. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=2817526574414774817
  80. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362242697942#c8612871441865190923
  81. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=8612871441865190923
  82. http://www.blogger.com/profile/10495805784088145688
  83. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362249721101#c2089924596514079287
  84. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=2089924596514079287
  85. http://www.blogger.com/profile/10495805784088145688
  86. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362251272500#c2968243290491987839
  87. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=2968243290491987839
  88. http://www.blogger.com/profile/15898357513326041822
  89. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362266283288#c6306691189731354678
  90. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=6306691189731354678
  91. http://www.blogger.com/profile/18394636887484222063
  92. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362298321582#c1011052828970129958
  93. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=1011052828970129958
  94. http://www.blogger.com/profile/02161161032642563814
  95. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362359055394#c1239989960937465040
  96. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=1239989960937465040
  97. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362374550573#c6560910772640309825
  98. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=6560910772640309825
  99. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362407062399#c4318207725199072243
 100. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=4318207725199072243
 101. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362422312711#c6563567572511728179
 102. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=6563567572511728179
 103. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362458347727#c460098039723283019
 104. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=460098039723283019
 105. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1362563619715#c7458216375997615599
 106. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=7458216375997615599
 107. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1363097851808#c1416591011074571137
 108. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=1416591011074571137
 109. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1363153157964#c3218652085364451766
 110. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=3218652085364451766
 111. http://www.blogger.com/profile/10495805784088145688
 112. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html?showComment=1363200669602#c7285751001354531927
 113. http://www.blogger.com/delete-comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=7285751001354531927
 114. http://www.blogger.com/comment.g?blogID=8890204&postID=5854741366106181779
 115. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/03/rankings-dont-matter-but.html
 116. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/icalp-formatting.html
 117. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/
 118. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/feeds/5854741366106181779/comments/default
 119. http://9dl7h78ivl8smpn7vl3d9mo2g1ajbhaj-a-blogger-opensocial.googleusercontent.com/gadgets/ifr?url=http://wms.assoc-amazon.com/GoogleGadgets/amzn_omakase.xml&container=blogger&view=default&lang=en&country=ALL&sanitize=0&v=d5bbce1e3fdc973d&libs=core:dynamic-height:google.blog:locked-domain:rpc:setprefs:skins:views&parent=http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/&up_size=1&up_color_theme=0&mid=2#up_color_theme=0&up_size=1&st=e%3DAFlCd0VKubHhOvbwuTsri2ZHkaLUPqWZXaOhEN4gm6jAHtm3K58m1d%252F6xLWHhJc344AotEyjFnm4KZ9rCWDcT4cmQ4cre6Eoi09dh5B60oxWrO8mDgN2%252BVro%252FfoxPJd6MoUTENXFuLvU%26c%3Dblogger&rpctoken=-7615468937369981110
 120. http://94ioh47ambsoose19no6q65gdjs5tj70-a-blogger-opensocial.googleusercontent.com/gadgets/ifr?url=http://wms.assoc-amazon.com/GoogleGadgets/amzn_searchbox.xml&container=blogger&view=default&lang=en&country=ALL&sanitize=0&v=d0bf7394d2b09003&libs=core:dynamic-height:google.blog:locked-domain:rpc:setprefs:skins:views&parent=http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/&up_size=1&mid=1#up_size=1&st=e%3DAFlCd0WC7H9rM02K7%252B2Jyq7ZO%252FCVhK9rbkqGI5b2qNiutxxJps3lfGDZLStHmpiBNHxQGKJvj6XaNZeZKXDPKgW2XkZvneO5d6zWGliXpd7aiCVphayu4ASb7EPk111lpG1kyV8dwHZc%26c%3Dblogger&rpctoken=1643794255041747156
 121. http://rcm.amazon.com/e/cm?t=michaelmitzen-20&o=1&p=8&l=as1&asins=0521835402&fc1=000000&=1&lc1=0000ff&bc1=000000&lt1=_blank&IS2=1&f=ifr&bg1=ffffff&f=ifr
 122. javascript:void(0)
 123. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/search?updated-min=2013-01-01T00:00:00-05:00&updated-max=2014-01-01T00:00:00-05:00&max-results=50
 124. javascript:void(0)
 125. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013_10_01_archive.html
 126. javascript:void(0)
 127. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013_09_01_archive.html
 128. javascript:void(0)
 129. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013_08_01_archive.html
 130. javascript:void(0)
 131. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013_07_01_archive.html
 132. javascript:void(0)
 133. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013_06_01_archive.html
 134. javascript:void(0)
 135. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013_05_01_archive.html
 136. javascript:void(0)
 137. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013_04_01_archive.html
 138. javascript:void(0)
 139. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013_03_01_archive.html
 140. javascript:void(0)
 141. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013_02_01_archive.html
 142. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html
 143. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/icalp-formatting.html
 144. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/online-censorship-day-and-other-links.html
 145. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/daily-show.html
 146. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/zachary-quinto-and-cherry-jones-are-in.html
 147. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/ad-board-update.html
 148. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/friday-ruminations.html
 149. javascript:void(0)
 150. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013_01_01_archive.html
 151. javascript:void(0)
 152. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/search?updated-min=2012-01-01T00:00:00-05:00&updated-max=2013-01-01T00:00:00-05:00&max-results=50
 153. javascript:void(0)
 154. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2012_12_01_archive.html
 155. javascript:void(0)
 156. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2012_11_01_archive.html
 157. javascript:void(0)
 158. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2012_10_01_archive.html
 159. javascript:void(0)
 160. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2012_09_01_archive.html
 161. javascript:void(0)
 162. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2012_08_01_archive.html
 163. javascript:void(0)
 164. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2012_07_01_archive.html
 165. javascript:void(0)
 166. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2012_06_01_archive.html
 167. javascript:void(0)
 168. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2012_05_01_archive.html
 169. javascript:void(0)
 170. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2012_04_01_archive.html
 171. javascript:void(0)
 172. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2012_03_01_archive.html
 173. javascript:void(0)
 174. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2012_02_01_archive.html
 175. javascript:void(0)
 176. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2012_01_01_archive.html
 177. javascript:void(0)
 178. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/search?updated-min=2011-01-01T00:00:00-05:00&updated-max=2012-01-01T00:00:00-05:00&max-results=50
 179. javascript:void(0)
 180. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2011_12_01_archive.html
 181. javascript:void(0)
 182. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2011_11_01_archive.html
 183. javascript:void(0)
 184. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2011_10_01_archive.html
 185. javascript:void(0)
 186. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2011_09_01_archive.html
 187. javascript:void(0)
 188. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2011_08_01_archive.html
 189. javascript:void(0)
 190. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2011_07_01_archive.html
 191. javascript:void(0)
 192. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2011_06_01_archive.html
 193. javascript:void(0)
 194. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2011_05_01_archive.html
 195. javascript:void(0)
 196. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2011_04_01_archive.html
 197. javascript:void(0)
 198. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2011_03_01_archive.html
 199. javascript:void(0)
 200. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2011_02_01_archive.html
 201. javascript:void(0)
 202. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/search?updated-min=2010-01-01T00:00:00-05:00&updated-max=2011-01-01T00:00:00-05:00&max-results=50
 203. javascript:void(0)
 204. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2010_12_01_archive.html
 205. javascript:void(0)
 206. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2010_10_01_archive.html
 207. javascript:void(0)
 208. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2010_08_01_archive.html
 209. javascript:void(0)
 210. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2010_07_01_archive.html
 211. javascript:void(0)
 212. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2010_06_01_archive.html
 213. javascript:void(0)
 214. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2010_05_01_archive.html
 215. javascript:void(0)
 216. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2010_04_01_archive.html
 217. javascript:void(0)
 218. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2010_03_01_archive.html
 219. javascript:void(0)
 220. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2010_02_01_archive.html
 221. javascript:void(0)
 222. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2010_01_01_archive.html
 223. javascript:void(0)
 224. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/search?updated-min=2009-01-01T00:00:00-05:00&updated-max=2010-01-01T00:00:00-05:00&max-results=50
 225. javascript:void(0)
 226. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2009_12_01_archive.html
 227. javascript:void(0)
 228. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2009_11_01_archive.html
 229. javascript:void(0)
 230. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2009_10_01_archive.html
 231. javascript:void(0)
 232. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2009_09_01_archive.html
 233. javascript:void(0)
 234. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2009_08_01_archive.html
 235. javascript:void(0)
 236. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2009_07_01_archive.html
 237. javascript:void(0)
 238. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2009_06_01_archive.html
 239. javascript:void(0)
 240. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2009_05_01_archive.html
 241. javascript:void(0)
 242. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2009_04_01_archive.html
 243. javascript:void(0)
 244. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2009_03_01_archive.html
 245. javascript:void(0)
 246. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2009_02_01_archive.html
 247. javascript:void(0)
 248. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2009_01_01_archive.html
 249. javascript:void(0)
 250. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/search?updated-min=2008-01-01T00:00:00-05:00&updated-max=2009-01-01T00:00:00-05:00&max-results=50
 251. javascript:void(0)
 252. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2008_12_01_archive.html
 253. javascript:void(0)
 254. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2008_11_01_archive.html
 255. javascript:void(0)
 256. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2008_10_01_archive.html
 257. javascript:void(0)
 258. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2008_09_01_archive.html
 259. javascript:void(0)
 260. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2008_08_01_archive.html
 261. javascript:void(0)
 262. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2008_07_01_archive.html
 263. javascript:void(0)
 264. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2008_06_01_archive.html
 265. javascript:void(0)
 266. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2008_05_01_archive.html
 267. javascript:void(0)
 268. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2008_04_01_archive.html
 269. javascript:void(0)
 270. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2008_03_01_archive.html
 271. javascript:void(0)
 272. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2008_02_01_archive.html
 273. javascript:void(0)
 274. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2008_01_01_archive.html
 275. javascript:void(0)
 276. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/search?updated-min=2007-01-01T00:00:00-05:00&updated-max=2008-01-01T00:00:00-05:00&max-results=50
 277. javascript:void(0)
 278. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2007_12_01_archive.html
 279. javascript:void(0)
 280. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2007_11_01_archive.html
 281. javascript:void(0)
 282. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2007_10_01_archive.html
 283. javascript:void(0)
 284. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2007_09_01_archive.html
 285. javascript:void(0)
 286. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2007_08_01_archive.html
 287. javascript:void(0)
 288. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2007_07_01_archive.html
 289. javascript:void(0)
 290. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2007_06_01_archive.html
 291. http://polylogblog.wordpress.com/
 292. http://andysresearch.blogspot.com/
 293. http://www.bitsbook.com/blog/
 294. http://weblog.fortnow.com/
 295. http://3dpancakes.typepad.com/ernie/
 296. http://science-professor.blogspot.com/
 297. http://www.freedom-to-tinker.com/
 298. http://geomblog.blogspot.com/
 299. http://in-theory.blogspot.com/
 300. http://infoweekly.blogspot.com/
 301. http://kdphd.blogspot.com/
 302. http://www.qinfo.org/people/nielsen/blog/
 303. http://mysliceofpizza.blogspot.com/
 304. http://11011110.livejournal.com/
 305. http://www.scottaaronson.com/blog/
 306. http://cs.unm.edu/~aaron/blog/
 307. http://terrytao.wordpress.com/
 308. http://matt-welsh.blogspot.com/
 309. http://www.blogger.com/profile/02161161032642563814
 310. http://www.blogger.com/profile/06738274256402616703

   Hidden links:
 311. http://www.blogger.com/post-edit.g?blogID=8890204&postID=5854741366106181779&from=pencil
 312. http://www.blogger.com/profile/17633745186684887140
 313. http://www.blogger.com/profile/02161161032642563814
 314. http://www.blogger.com/profile/18394636887484222063
 315. http://www.blogger.com/profile/03019442378581634856
 316. http://www.blogger.com/profile/03019442378581634856
 317. http://www.blogger.com/profile/15898357513326041822
 318. http://www.blogger.com/profile/09644595632189419277
 319. http://www.blogger.com/profile/15898357513326041822
 320. http://robert-kleinberg.myopenid.com/
 321. http://www.blogger.com/profile/10495805784088145688
 322. http://www.blogger.com/profile/10495805784088145688
 323. http://www.blogger.com/profile/18394636887484222063
 324. http://www.blogger.com/profile/02161161032642563814
 325. http://www.blogger.com/profile/10495805784088145688
 326. http://www.blogger.com/profile/10495805784088145688
 327. http://www.blogger.com/profile/15898357513326041822
 328. http://www.blogger.com/profile/18394636887484222063
 329. http://www.blogger.com/profile/02161161032642563814
 330. http://www.blogger.com/profile/10495805784088145688
 331. http://mybiasedcoin.blogspot.com/2013/02/discussing-stoc-2013-pc-with-joan.html
 332. http://www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=8890204&widgetType=Gadget&widgetId=Gadget2&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar
 333. http://www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=8890204&widgetType=Gadget&widgetId=Gadget1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar
 334. http://www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=8890204&widgetType=HTML&widgetId=HTML1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar
 335. http://www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=8890204&widgetType=Gadget&widgetId=Gadget3&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar
 336. http://www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=8890204&widgetType=BlogArchive&widgetId=BlogArchive1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar
 337. http://www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=8890204&widgetType=LinkList&widgetId=LinkList1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar
 338. http://www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=8890204&widgetType=Profile&widgetId=Profile1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar
 339. http://www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=8890204&widgetType=Text&widgetId=Text1&action=editWidget&sectionId=sidebar
 340. http://www.blogger.com/rearrange?blogID=8890204&widgetType=HTML&widgetId=HTML3&action=editWidget&sectionId=footer
